# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Sert G el Regional Secretaries -  -  -  Broome 606 ع‎ n:

Newsletter Editor Eu op: D.H.J.va d Wil Dr. MB. Mitch e UK. andE e Mir. - W. Wi Annual Subscription £3-; HFI.1S- 0: 6-Odol s North Amerc: Mr. بط‎ - Ho Newsletter number 58 February 1979 Members News

We are sorry to record the death, in Nairobi, of Mr. D. Chandaria (208). A number of ONS members will

remember the pleasure of attending meetings at his London home. Mr. Riches of Ross on Wye has changed

his interests to include Puri-Kushan and late Kushan coin series; also the Multiple Dirhem series of Afghanistan struck during the Samanid - Ghaznavid period. He would like to hear from any members interested in these coin series. He also reports from Herat on the presence of forged White Hun coins of the Napki Malik type

and other forgeries of Ghaznavid dinars and Byzantine solidi. Dr. F. Turk of Cornwall notes that he and Mr. J. Cribb of London have almost finished the text of the first part of their projected monograph on Far Eastern coin charms (amulets and talismans) which will also contain a section on Javanese specimens. Their study includes much material from the collection of the later Mr. Edgar Mandell. They would be pleased to

have information about other relevant items. Mr. Michael Robinson of Cheshire and Mr. Lewis Shaw of Welwyn are compiling information with a view to writing a book on the coins and banknotes of Burma. They would be grateful for details of any unusual specimens or reports. Mr. Commisaddi of Mogadisciu,

Somalia, seeks the following books: Scholten, Coins of the Dutch overseas territories; Parkinson, J, An

unsolved riddle; mysterious ruins in Somaliland: Curle, A, The ruined cities of Somaliland: Freeman-Grenville

and Martin, Preliminary handlist of the Arabic inscriptions of the East African coast. ONS meetings

In the Netherlands there will be a meeting on April 9th. 1979 from 10.30 am. at Prof. de Roever's house, Trompenburg 5, Amstelveen, Netherlands (note address). In London there will be a meeting on Saturday

10th. March at 2 pm. in St. James' Hall, 6 Gloucester Terrace, London W 2 (by Lancaster Gate Underground

station) and there will be an auction of members' duplicate coins. Please contact Mr. Ken Wiggins about this. In Germany there will be a meeting on 12th. May 1979 from 11.00 am. at the Park Hotel, Frankfurt; this

should be of particular interest to collectors of Indian series. Some recent publications

- B. F. Dauwe, Additional notes on Mamluk Numismatics, Intermunz - bereit 82, pp. 6 - 8 - Denys,  Beeldenaar munten der Ortokiieden, Beni-zengiden en Ajoebiten, De Beeldenaar 2, 1978, 3 - 9.

- Hoehstrasser, Die Kupferpragung unter Sultan Sulejman 11, Intermunz - Bereit 82, pp. 4 - 6. - Lingen,  Note on the earliest Madras pagoda struck by the British E. I. C., Spink's Numismatic Circular, January 1979, 2 -3. - M. MacKenzie, Enver Pasha and his emergency paper money, Spink's NC., Feb. 1979, 66 - 67.

- Robinson, The Mandalay mint, Coins and Medals, Feb. 1979, 19-21.

A book list has been received from Messrs. K. P. Bagchi & Co. of 286 B.B. Ganguli Street, Calcutta 700 012 which includes a number of new books on Indian coinage, as well as some reprints of standard works.

Information sheets Information sheet no. 20 on Mamluk sequins has now been distributed to members. The next publication will be Occasional Paper no. 12 on The Ottoman coins of Tilimsan by Henri Arroyo. A full listing of Information Sheets and Occasional Papers available to members will be included in a forthcoming Newsletter.
Inscribed South Indian gold fanams struck by the Marathas of Tanjore by M. B. Mitchiner

In AD 1674 the Maratha Venkaji (Ekoji), acting as general to the 'Adil Shahi of Bijapur, captured Tanjore

and expelled the local ruler, Alagiri Nayaka, who had recently been placed on the throne of Tanjore by Chokkanatha Nayaka of Madura. Venkaji placed his own puppet, Sengamala Das, on the throne of Tanjore but retained real power in his own hands. In 1678 Venkaji was recognised as ruler of Tanjore by his brother Sivaji, the Maratha of Satara who now exercised substantive power in the southern Deccan. From that date until 1855 Tanjore was ruled by a branch of the Marathas belonging to the family of Venkaji, though during

the last century of their existence they were dominated first by the French and then by the British. The

Marathas of Tanjore were, like their northern neighbours at Satara, known by the title Chatrapati (Chhatrapati)

and this is the title that appears on the gold fanams presented here. Inscribed coins so far attributed to the Marathas of Tanjore comprise only copper specimens. A few of these bear the names of the first two rulers, Venkaji (1674 - 1685) and Shahji (1685 - 1711) but the majority bear only the common title of the line (Obv. Sri: Rev. Chatrapati, or Obv. Bull: Rev. Chatrapati)!. The three gold fanams described here came from a collection formed in Penninsular India and bear the normal family title. AV Fanams: weights 0.38, 0.39 and 0.40 gm

## diameters 7 to 9 mm.

D A \\ Obv. Sri / Ra ja el Rev. Cha tra / pa ti dS\] U \| 6 © small circle shows the natural coin size,

# the drawings are enlarged) © cfr. M. 8. Mitchiner, World of Islam p. 407

A second silver tanka of Sultan Muzaffar Shah I of Gujarat by John S. Deyell Some time ago in these pages (ONS. Newsletter no. 49 of June 1977) Jan Lingen published the first known specimen of a silver tanka struck by the Gujarat Sultan Muzaffar Shah I (AH 810 - 813: AD 1407 - 1410).

This was also the earliest recorded silver coin of that newly independant province. Recently I came across another silver tanka of this ruler. It is of a new type and is dated xx3, which reconstructs as AH 813. Thus Mr. Lingen's coin, dated AH 812, remains the initial silver issue of Gujarat.

Description: Weight 10.6 gm., diameter 22 mm., metal silver. Obverse: Reverse:

# ‏eno الرنيا و

يرلان تموملاني ابو ‏+J>[الله خلرت خلافته ‏PJA\[ مظوز شاه اخلسلان Nayeb amir al - muminin abu 'abd - allah khaldat khilafat (81) 3

"Deputy of the Commander of the Faithfull, Father of the servant of God, may his Caliphate endure. (AH 81) 3" 0 allah wa al - 7

Shams - ud - duniya wa ud - din Muzaffar Shah al - sultan

\*""(Defender?, servant?) of God and of the country, Shams - ud duniya wa ud- din Muzaffar Shah the Sultan"

The obverse legend closely resembles that of the Lingen coin in wording and calligraphy, differing only in the date and in the addition of the expression "'Abu 'Abd-allah". The reverse is quite distinctive; with the Sultan's name enclosed in a circle. The marginal inscription is fragmentary and the reading given above must be considered a conjectural reconstruction. The coin is interesting in that it copies not only the legends of contemporary billon and copper coins of the Delhi Sultanate but also the style of enclosing the ruler's name in a circle. It foreshadows the coinage of later Gujarat sultans in the use of geometric enclosure, although the grandiose forms of title appear to have been simplified in the issues of later reigns.

# ee, --- Who was Bushby Sahib? by K. W. Wiggins

Type I obv. Rev., Type II obv. J! 9) ypu جوم \| جسن‎ 5) Pity It is unknown, even in this bureaucratic age, for a civil servant's name to appear on contemporary coin. This honour was a prerogative of monarchs and occasionally of presidents, dictators or other heads of State. It is therefore something of a numismatic novelty to find a copper coin issued by the chief of a Central Indian Native State with the name of a white sahib on its reverse.

These coins are fairly well known and it is possible that the majority of collectors of later Indian coins will have a specimen. What is probably not so well known is the identity of BUSHBY SAHIB. The only clue to his recognition is the word AGENT which precedes his name of the coin. This term may conjure up in the mind of anyone examining this coin a number of intriguing questions. What, or for whom, was he agent?

- the Treasury, the Mint, the Queen, the Rajah......? In fact Bushby Sahib was the Commisioner and Agent to the Governor General of India for the Saugor and Nerbudda Territories and Bundelkhand.

George Alexander Bushby was an Englishman who, at an early stage in life, decided to make a career with the East India Company. His date and place of birth are unknown though he must have been born in the year 1799. He evidently came from a fairly well-to-do family and must have received a sufficiently ung education to enable him to be accepted at the East India College, Haileybury, in 1815 for a specialise education that would fit him for the Comany's service. The young Bushby entered Haileybury College at the end of 1815 and after two years, in December 1817, he is mentioned in the list of highly distinguished pupils, although not gaining any prize for merit in any particular subject. He received a similar mention at the end of term in May 1818 and one may judge that he was one of the more diligent pupils of the college.

In May 1818 Bushby left Haileybury with the rank of writer in the Honourable East India Company's service - his appointment dating from 30th. April 1818. He then went to India and, although at first designated for service in the Bombay Presidency, he went, for some reason, to Bengal: more precisely to Calcutta. It can

be presumed that he arrived in India at the end of 1818, or early in 1819. He served as a writer in an unspecified office until the 16th. February 1821 when he was appointed Assistant to the Magistrate of the Suburbs of Calcutta. He remained in this post until 3rd. August 1821 and then took up the position of Assistant in the Office of the Registrar of Sudder Dewany and Nizmat Adawlat (the civil High Court). Four months later he was appointed Extra Assistant to the Resident at Hyderabad. He remained in this post for four years and then, on the 8th. December 1825, he came back to Calcutta with the position of Superintendant of the Calcutta Lotteries. He occupied this post for about six months and then moved with amazing rapidity from position to position within the structure of the Bengal Civil Service as his list of appointments shows:

23rd. February 1826, Sub-secretary to the Lower Board of Revenue; 3151. January 1828, Secretary to the Lower Board of Revenue; Ist. March 1829, Junior Secretary to the Sudder Board; 3rd. December 183 Officiating Secretary in the Judicial and Territorial Department; Ist. May 1832, Office of the Post Master General; 20th. March 1835, Secretary to the Government of India and Bengal General Department;

27th. November 1835, Secretary to the Lieutenant Governor North-west Provinces, Political and General Department; 26th. November 1836, Officiating Secretary to the same Lieutenant Governor. Whether all these

frequent changes of post were part of a pre-planned career programme, or whether they were made at Bushby's request is not known, but it seems to signify that he was a singularly competent and adaptable civil servant.

In 1837, after 19 years in India, he returned to England for an extended leave. In 1840 he was back in India

as Secretary to the Government of India and Bengal in the General and Financial Department. In this capacity he was an ex officio Director of the Bank of Bengal and a member of the Mint Committee. By 1842 he had

again changed his post to become Officiating Secretary to the Government of India and Bengal in the Secret and Political Department and in the same year he became a member of the Finance Committee. In 1847 he

was appointed Secretary to the Government of India, Home Department, and by this time was a 2nd. Class civil servant.

We now come to the period of the coin which bears his name. In 1849 Bushby, now an administrator of considerable experience, was appointed Commissioner and Agent for the Saugor and Nerbudda Territories and Bundelkhand and also Agent to the Governor General for Sindhia's Territories. In this post he followed the better known Lt. Col. W. H. Sleeman, who had been largely responsible for suppressing the Thugee sect in

this region. Bushby now had the responsibility for administering a tremendous area comprising the northern

part of the Central Provinces; which had been in British hands since 1818. He also had to keep a keen eye on

the semi-autonomous governments of the feudatory states in Bundelkhand which were in the hands of native chiefs. These feudatories numbered, at that time, thirty five, the most important being Bijawar, Charkhari, Chhatarpur, Datia, Orchha, Panna and Rewa. Rewa was later transferred to the Indore Agency.

(to be continued)