# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  Broome General Section: Mr. C, M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel Dr. M. B. Mitchiner

UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins Annual Subscription £3-00; H.FL 15-00; 6-00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 55 June 1978 Members News

Mr. G. D. Agarwal (483) has coins of Tibet, Bhutan, Sikkim, Nepal and India for disposal and would like to correspond with other members on these series. Sotheby's (London) held an auction of 296 lots of Islamic coins, mainly gold, in April. Prices ranged from £ 18 to £ 3,800 per lot. They will be holding another Islamic coin sale in October. Forthcoming meetings

The Numismatic Society of India will be holding its 66th. Annual Conference under the auspices of the Department of History, University of Burdwan, Burdwan 713101, West Bengal during the first week of October 1978. For further details please contact Dr. Nisar Ahmad, Secretary of the NSI, PO. Hindu University, Varanasi 5, India. The next London meeting of the ONS will be held on Saturday October 21 st. at St. James' Hall, 6 Gloucester Terrace, London W 2 and will commence at 2-30 pm. ONS Accounts

Copies of the balance sheet are available from our Treasurer, Mr. Vic. Brown, for the price of a stamped

addressed envelope (UK) or an International Reply Coupon (other countries).

Articles pertinent to Oriental Numismatics published in the Revue Belge de Numismatique et de Sigillographie from 1967 onwards: compiled by R. van Laere.

In 1965 and 1966 an index was published on all articles that had appeared since volume 37 (1881) Volume 113 (1967) \_ nihil 114 (1968) سر‎ Naster, Les monnaies d'Edesse revélent-elles un dieu 'Ellul?, pp. 5 - 13: 1 pl. 115 (1969) \_ nihil 116 (1970) - Naster, Karsha et sheqel dans les documents araméens d'Eléphantine, pp. 31 - 35 - Naster, Les monnaies de Perside, 6612201115 du culte du feu, pp. 296-297 (the

complete text was published in the review Orientalia Lovaniensia Periodica 1, 1970,

125 - 129: 1 pl) 117 (1971) - van Haeperen-Pourbaix,  Les épith®tes du dieu M@én d'aprts les monnaies, pp. 71 - 79. 118 (1972) - M. Metcalf,  Classification of the Trams of Levon I of Cilician Armenia, pp. 109 - 126, 3 pls.

- Morrisson,  Le Trésor Byzantin de Nikertai, pp. 29 - 93, VII pls. (with some Abbasid coins). 119 (1973) - Colin, Les monnaies Portugaises en Afrique aux XVI et XVII siécles, pp. 217-218

- Gorini, Ripostiglio di zecchini veneziani  a Nikertai, pp. 161 - 167, 1 pl. - Zaqzouq,  The Ottoman gold hoard discovered in Nikertay, kept now in the Hama Museum, pp. 145 - 160, 1 pl. 120 (1974) \| nihil

121 (1975) - van Laere,  De Larijnen: een handelsmunt in het Nabije en Midden Oosten (16-19 eeuw), pp. 157-163 (with printers' errors). 122 (1976) © nihil 123 (1977) - van Laere, Le monnayage circulaire des Iles Maldives, pp. 159 - 170. --- Some recent publications

- and D. Burns, The coinage of Ghengis Khan, Numismatics International bulletin, March 1978, 81 - 84 - C. Choubay, Coins of the Bodhi dynasty from Tripuri, J. Numismatic Society of India XXXVIIIii, 1976,

62 - 72. - K. Dasgupta, Two interesting coins in the Singhi collection,  - Numismatic Society of India, XXXVIIIii, 1976, 55 - 59. - Gokhale, Elephanta hoard of copper coins of Krishnaraja, JNSI XXXVIIIii, 1976, 89 - 91. - L. Gupta, British Museum Romano-Kushana Medallion: its nature and importance, JNSI XXXVIIIii, 1976

73 - 81. - Handa, Some more clay sealings from Sunet,  JNSI XXXVIIIii, 1976, 96 - 97 - Hennequin, Bonne ou mauvaise monnaie?: Mutations monetaires et loi de Gresham avant l'poquemoderne,

l'Information Historique, tome XXXIX no. 5, Paris Nov-Dec. 1977. - G. Humphris,  Die varieties of British Indian coinage 1938 to 1947, NI. Bulletin May 1978, 163 - 166. - Lachman, The eighteenth century Egyptian copper coinage, Spink's Numismatic Circular, May 1978, 238-9 - N. Lahiri,  Complexities of the silver punchmarked coins, J. Numismatic Society of India, XXXVIIIii, 1976, 1 - 34.

- Lahiri, India's earliest inscribed coins: the City issues, ibid., 35 - 54.

- M. MacKenzie, Selim 111 and Mustafa IV silver and gold coins (contd.), Spink's NC. May 1978, 240 - 242. - M. MacKenzie, Selim 111 and Mustafa IV silver and gold coins (concl.), Spink's NC. June 1978, 304 - 305.

- N. Mukherjee, A unique Satrapal coin, JNSI XXXVIIIii, 1976, 60 - 61. - Negre, Le Monnayage d'Or des sept derniers Califes Abbassides, Studia Islamica, fas. XLVII, Paris 1978. - Plant, The wonderful world of the Urtugids, Seaby's Coin & Medal bulletin, May 1978, 142 - 144. - Plant,  The wonderful world of the Urtugids (contd.), Seaby's C. & M. bulletin June 1978, 173 - 174. - G. Rhodes, A Tibetan forgery, Spink's NC. July-Aug. 1978, 364. - Snartt,  The rarity of East India Company coins (contd.), Seaby's C & M. bull., June 1978, 176 - 179. - Snartt, An unusual E. I. C. coin of Sumatra, Spink's NC. July-Aug. 1978, 361.

- W. West, Medieval Coinage of Kashmir, Numismatics International bulletin, March 1978, 69 - 78.

Islamic Coins by Ariel Berman Catalogue of the Winter 1976 Exhibition at the L. - Mayer Memorial Institute for Islamic Art Paperback, pp. 155 with maps, full page and text illustrations. Published: Jerusalem 1976. Price: £ 11 - 00

The catalogue lists, in English and Hebrew, 461 coins exhibited at this institute as being "'a fairly representative selection" of coins in circulation in the region of Israel from the early days of the Arab conquest in the 7th. century AD to the end of the 18th. century. The coins were drawn from the Institute's own collection and those of the Kadman Numismatic Museum, Tel Aviv and the Israel Department of Antiquities and Museums, Jerusalem: also from several private collections, including that of the author, Ariel Berman. A short introduction outlines a few highlights of numismatic history in the area and draws attention to some of the rarer coins here published for the first time. A list of Arabic legends is provided in Arabic, Hebrew and English together with indexes of mints and names in Arabic and English and an alphabetic concordance between Hebrew and Arabic letters and Romanisation used in the text. The catalogue also includes a chronological chart of the Islamic dynasties represented and a short bibliography.
Useful though this background material is, the book will be bough primarliy for its descriptive listing of coins and this is where its main weakness is apparent, for those wishing to use it as a survey of the coinage rather than as a guide to coins on display. This lies in the fact that the legends are not given in full, or indeed at all in Arabic, but are described as, for example ''in centre, the name of Al-Nasir' instead of listing the titles and lagabs found on the coin. To a great extent, this deficiency is fortunately made good by careful referencing to the main published collections and by the extensive and excellent photographs both natural size and enlarged, with which the book abounds.

The coins are grouped under the usual dynastic headings, beginning with Arab-Byzantine coppers, under the slightly misleading heading of "Orthodox Caliphs" and concluding with 122 Ottoman coins up to the end of Mahmud II's reign. For each coin, the rulers and caliph shown are named, together with the date and mint of issue where these are known. The metal, diameter and weight are given together with a description of the coin type, a translation of some or all of the legend and a reference, where appropriate, to one of the publications listed in the bibliography. Some of the dates have presumably been derived from die links with other coins where the illustrated specimen, eg. no. 195, clearly does not show the full date assigned in the

description. Both Hejira and Christian dates are shown for rulers and Caliphs and this is a useful feature for readers whose historical chronology is based on events in the western world. The value of applying the same practice to the coins themselves is less obvious as they are normally dated to a particular year in the Hejira. It is not clear whether, for example the equation of 624 H with 1226 AD for coin no. 194 implies some evidence that it was struck during the 10 days by which these years overlapped or whether this is just an unusual approximation. A particular delight for the reviewer was the juxtaposition of coins of different dynasties struck in the same area. This makes it possible in one book to follow particular mints through the centuries; the coins for Damascus for example being covered from the facing bust Arab-Byzantine type up to Ottoman pieces of Murad IV struck over 900 years later.

It is interesting to see that coins considered by the author to have circulated in the area include not only the Arab-Sassanian drachms which have been found in hoards associated with post-reform Umayyad silver, but also the half drachms of Tabaristan struck some 50 years later to a weight standard which must by then have been obsolete in Eastern Mediterranean countries. One wonders also at the reasons for following Pere in attributing anonymous coin no. 340 to the first Ottoman ruler '"Uthman, when Artuk has published a very closely similar piece of Ishaq of the Sarukhans who reigned some 50 years after "Uthman. But these are minor matters and any book that sets out to cover such a wide range of material to this level of detail inevitably contains points on which disagreement is possible. The object of the L. A. Meyer Memorial Institute of providing a selection of illustrations of Islamic Art must have been comfortably met by the original exhibition and Daniela Golan's excellent photographs have been clearly reproduced and displayed in the catalogue with great effect. The whole production is to a high standard and although expensive, this book can rightly claim a place on the shelves of anyone with a serious interest in Islamic art as evidenced by the coinage of the Near East. Michael Broome

Coins of the Sindhias by Jan Lingen and Kenneth Wiggins

108 pages, one map, fully illustrated by line drawings; card covers. Price £ 12 - 50 Available from B. A. Seaby Ltd., 11 Margaret Street, London W. 1

An outstanding book on the coinage struck in the Indian Native States. Many hundreds of coins struck by the

Sindhias who ruled the Indian State of Gwalior have been catalogued by Jan Lingen and Kenneth Wiggins, two of the foremost European scholars in the field of Indian Native States' coinage. The various coin issues are clearly set out in tabular form, with detailed drawings of the designs and the various symbols that help to distinguish the many issues.

This is the first detailed description of coinage struck in Gwalior State and many of the issues have never been published before. The coins are arranged according to mints, of which over twenty are defined, and each section of the catalogue is prefaced by a discussion of the history of the mint and of its coinage. Much of the material in the various historical introductions has been gleaned from documents in contemporary archives and in the annual reports of administrative departments; documents not readily accessible. The authors have amassed a large body of material and organised it into a work of reference that is both detailed and very easy to read. review reproduced by kind permission of Frank Purvey
Two Nazr coins of the Cis - Sutlej States by Kenneth Wiggins

1.  AR Rupee: diameter 32mm., weight 11.5 grammes Obverse:. Urol \>\| % ws yo jl حلم ضر‎ Hukm shad az qadir bichum bi Ahmad bad Shah

va::: Sicca zad bar seem wazir az owj mahi tabah mah als 44 sb سكة زح بر سم وزر از اوج‎

# Reverse. Yay ضر ربب‎ Zarb Sarhind Age lo "ل ميمترن‎

Some of the coins of the Cis-Sutlej states are difficult to attribute with accuracy, for the majority of them bear on the obverse the archaic distich of Ahmad Shah Durrani and they do not have any indication of their true date or of their place of minting. According to Temple' the coins struck in the States of Maler Kotla, Nabha, Jhind and Patiala all bear the mint name Sirhind and are dated to the fourth regnal year of Ahmad Shah; the year in which he first struck coins at this city. These features were perpetuated on coins struck thereafter by the Cis-Sutlej chiefs until the early 20th. century. The only features which distinguish these various coins from each other are the subsidiary marks placed on them. These marks are said to be the

symbols, or emblems, of the various chiefs of the states.

The coin illustrated here is a finely struck piece on a wide flan which seems to have been intended as a nazr coin. It has been assigned to Nabha State for several reasons:

It does not bear any marks peculiar to the coins of the other Cis-Sutlej States According to Temple only the coins of Nabha bear their dates in the Samvat era This piece compares well with a dump rupee of the same date illustrated by Temple (Plate II, no. 40). Temple's coin is assigned to Jaswant Singh (AD 1783 - 1840). The Samvat date 1893 (= AD 1836) confirms this chronology, but I have been unable to trace any particular event in that year which would have called for the issue of a nazr rupee.

- ©. Temple, The coins of the Modern Native Chiefs of the Panjab, Indian Antiquary, November 1889.

AR Double Rupee: diameter 33 mm., weight 23.65 grammes

## Obverse

The usual distich of Ahmad Shah Durrani رسررس‎ A Additionally the words - Zarb Sarhind - each side

## Reverse: Centre

= ع على حا‎ Ahmad Ali Khan MER eee Oe ot جلو‎ Jalus 4 Nawab pp ge Bahadur

## Around: لفضل‎

wd I? سركة‎ ye ae Zad bar sicca daulat al faizal 5 زب كولم عدم والى‎ rab karim bihukm walli Maler بر‎ ~ - - Kotla bar seem sanah 1326 Ir\] Bw سر نسم‎ als This double rupee was probably struck on the accession of Nawab Ahmad Ali Khan as ruler of Maler Kotla. He was formally installed and invested with ruling powers by the Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab on the

5th. January 1909 after succeeding on the 23rd. August 1908: both events falling in the Hegira year 1326.

I am indebted to two ONS members, C. K. Panish and Jan Lingen, for their helpful comments on these two coins.