No. 247 Spring 2022 ISSN 1818-1252 **Editor** Karan Singh
# 

** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 247** Page

*Silver Coins of Jajapella King Gopala Deva* ~ Karan Singh

*Some Aq Qoyunlu and Safavid Copper Coins of Jahrom* ~ Seyed Omid Mohammadi and Reza Ghanaatpishe * *

*Pucka Pice in Fatehpur District 1839: The Wide and Long-lasting Circulation of Awadh's Coppers* ~ Jan Lingen and Jan Lucassen

*Catalogue of the Coins of the Bengal Presidency - Part III* ~ Paul Stevens and Robert Johnston

Book Review: *Erach Rediscovered: Coins, Inscriptions, Seals and Sealings* *(Om Prakash Lal Srivastava) * ~ Karan Singh ONS News * *

**From the Editor** ** ** This bumper issue is my 16 th volume as Editor. It has been an incredible journey these past four years, bringing you the best and latest research in Oriental numismatics. The Journal is now in colour, it is peer-reviewed to ensure the quality of the research that we publish, and it is issued four times a year. In our members' survey conducted last November, 96% of you rated the Journal as the most valuable benefit of being an ONS member. My thanks go to all our members who have supported this publication with their articles and reviews.

I am now stepping down as Editor and am proud to leave the Journal in this strong position. I look forward to my successor taking it to even greater heights, and to many more years of ground-breaking numismatic research. **Karan Singh**
# SILVER COINS OF JAJAPELLA KING

# GOPALA DEVA

Karan Singh Narwar, or Nalagiri as it was known in the medieval period (Garde 1918: 242), is a fort in the Shivpuri district of Madhya Pradesh, located about 80 km from Gwalior. It was the centre of a Hindu kingdom during the 13 th century that flowered briefly when the Delhi Sultanate was distracted with its own power struggles and internal rebellions. For about 60 years - from the ascension of Raziyya Sultan in 1236 CE till the rule of Alauddin Khalji in 1296 - when the reach of the Delhi Sultans faltered, a local dynasty, the Jajapellas ( *Yajvapala* ) (idem), was able to carve out a kingdom with its capital at Nalagiri.

There were five (or six) kings in this dynasty, whom we know from inscriptions and their copper coins (Table A). The first Jajapella king to rule from Nalagiri was Chahada Deva, who captured the fort from Malaya Varma Deva (1223-1233), a Pratihara ruler (idem) who issued scarce copper *jitals * (Tye 56; Deyell 362). Chahada's son Naravarman is mentioned in inscriptions (Sircar 1957-1958: 343-345; Sircar 1959-1960: 3436), but no coins of his have been found yet. John Deyell and Robert Tye included a second king with the name Chahada (Chahada Deva II), on the basis of one specimen with the date VS 1355 (1298 CE). However, this could well be a VS 1322 date written retrograde. Till more specimens with supporting dates turn up, I am inclined to see only one king with the name Chahada Deva. *Table A. Copper coinage of Jajapella kings * **Name** **Known** **dates (CE)** **Rarity** **Ref.** Chahada Deva I 1242-1259 Common Tye 57; Deyell 363 Naravarman ( *Nrivarman* ) No coins known

Asala Deva 1255-1308 Common Tye 58; Deyell 364 Gopala Deva 1280-1289 No coins verified Ganapati Deva 1291-1298 Very rare Tye 60 Chahada Deva II? Very rare Tye 59; Deyell 365

Jajapella copper coins have been well-documented, though no silver coins were recorded by Deyell or Tye. I will present three silver coins of this dynasty here. These are of Gopala Deva (1280-1289 CE), who is known from inscriptions during his reign and that of his son Ganapati (Cunningham 1894: 90; Garde 1918: 242). No copper coins of Gopala Deva have been confirmed so far. R.C. Banerjee wrote that 147 coins of Gopala Deva were found in the Gwalior Hoard of 1915 (Banerjee 1920: 80), but a few pages later, he noted that these are actually coins of Ganapati Deva (Banerjee 1920: 84). P.C. Roy refers to 8 coins of Gopala Deva in Patna Museum (Roy 1980: 140), but these are not illustrated anywhere and so cannot be verified. These coins may have been a part of the Gwalior Hoard and therefore misattributed. **Silver coins of Gopala Deva** I will present two silver coin types of this king: the Lakshmi Type and Horseman Type.

**Type A: Lakshmi Type** This has Goddess Lakshmi seated on obverse, and was first published by Sharma and Verma (2000: 5). The depiction of Lakshmi, the Hindu goddess of wealth, in this seated form was popular in northern and central India in the medieval period - she is seen on gold coins from Kalachuri king Gangeyadeva (1015-1041 CE) onwards, across several dynasties and kings till the 13 th century. Yet this is the first time we see her on a coin issued by a Jajapella ruler. Till Gopala Deva, all the coins issued by this dynasty were horseman type copper *jitals* with the king's name on the reverse. We will discuss the possible reason for Gopala's numismatic innovation later.

*Fig. 1. Gopala Deva silver coin (Type A) * *1.47 g, dated VS (13)45 (Karan Singh collection) * * *

Obverse: 4-armed Goddess Lakshmi seated facing, holding
lotus blossoms in both top hands Reverse: Devanagari legend in three lines *sri go(pa) * *la deva * *sam 45 *

*Fig. 2. Gopala Deva silver coin (Type A) * *1.46 g, dated VS (13)46 (Kohinoor Auction 4, Lot 79)*

Obverse: 4-armed Goddess Lakshmi seated facing, holding
lotus blossoms in both top hands Reverse: Devanagari legend in three lines *sri gopa *

*la deva * *sam 46 * The dates on these two coins are * * VS (Vikram Samvat) 1345 = 1288 CE (Fig. 1), and VS 1346 = 1289 CE (Fig. 2). **Type B: Horseman Type** This is a new type that is being published here for the first time. This is known from just one specimen (Fig. 3).

*Fig. 3. Gopala Deva silver coin (Type B) * *1.38 g, dated VS (13)46 (Karan Singh collection) *
Obverse: Horseman advancing right Reverse: Devanagari legend in three lines

*sri gopa * *la devam * *(sa)m 46 * **Attribution** Let us now examine the attribution of these silver coins to Jajapella king Gopala Deva. Firstly, the horseman on the obverse in Fig. 3 provides a clear link with the copper coins of the Jajapellas. Compare this horseman with that seen on the *jitals* issued by Gopaladeva's father, Asala Deva (Fig. 4).

*Fig. 4. Asala Deva copper jital, * *dated VS (13)23 (Karan Singh collection) * The similarity between the two horseman depictions (Fig. 5) shows these two rulers are closely connected and confirms that the Gopala Deva of the three silver coins is the Gopala Deva of the Jajapella dynasty.

*Fig. 5. Comparison of horseman on the coins of Asala Deva *

*(left) and his son Gopala Deva (right) * ** ** Furthermore, the depiction of Lakshmi in Figs. 1 and 2 resembles that on the silver issues of Hammira Deva (1281-1301 CE) of neighbouring Ranthambhor (Fig. 6). Note especially the rounded style of Lakshmi's knees as she sits with crossed legs, and the fact that the goddess is shown holding two lotus blossoms, one each in her two top hands, unlike other depictions of this period where such blossoms are missing.

*Fig. 6. Hammira Deva silver ½ tanka, 5.42 g, * * dated VS (13)45 (Stephen Album Auction 15, Lot 867) *

*(Deyell 367a) * Hammira Deva issued coins with the same date, VS (13)45 or 1289 CE. This, and the similarity in Lakshmi's depiction, indicates that whoever issued the silver coins of Gopala Deva was a contemporary of Hammira Deva (see Fig. 7). We know that Gopala Deva of Nalagiri was, from inscriptions (Sharma and Verma 2000: 6). So, it is safe to attribute our silver coins to him.

*Fig. 7. Comparison of Lakshmi on the coins of Gopala Deva *

*(left) and Hammira Deva (right) * **Metrology** The average weight of our three silver coins is 1.44 g, which is around ¼ of the Hammira Deva silver coin, i.e. 1/8 *tanka*. So, it appears that the smaller Narwar kingdom may have been following the lead of its contemporary, by issuing silver coins in the same denomination structure as a quarter unit. **Overlap in dates** There is an overlap of dates between Asala Deva and Gopala Deva (and Ganapati Deva) that needs to be explained. From the coins and inscriptions of Asala, we have these dates: VS 1312, 1315, 1318, 1319, 1320, 1322, 1327, 1328-1330, 1332, 1336, 1344, 1346 (see Fig. 8), 1348, 1349, 1353, 1354 and 1363-1365 (Tye 1995: 98). Similarly, Gopala has dates of VS 1336 (Sircar 1959-1960; 31-36), 1337 (Cunningham 1894: 90), 1339 (Garde 1918: 242) and 1345-1346 (Figs. 1-3). His son Ganapati has dates of VS 134x, 1348 (Cunningham 1894: 90, 93), 1350 and 1355 (Sircar 1958-1959: 339-342).

*Fig. 8. Asala Deva copper jital, 3.52 g, * *dated VS 1346 (Karan Singh collection) * Assuming that Asala Deva's dates are not all misread, we have to explain how he overlaps the reigns of his son and grandson. There can only be three possible explanations: 1. There may have been three kings called Asala. Asala I ruled
before Gopala; Gopala ruled for a few years; and then Asala II came to the throne in VS 1346; there was a short interlude for Ganapati; and then Asala III came to the throne after him; or 2. There was only one king called Asala and he had three reigns.

He abdicated for his son Gopala, but when Gopala died shortly afterwards, Asala was forced to return to the throne in VS 1346. He then abdicated once again when his grandson  Ganapati was of age, but after Ganapati's short rule, Asala came back to rule in his old age; or 3. Asala divided his kingdom into two parts to counter the threat
from a rejuvenated Delhi Sultanate, and appointed his son Gopala to rule over the second part while Asala continued to rule over the first or main part. This bifurcation continued when Gopala died and Asala's grandson Ganapati issued coins from the second part, while Asala himself continued to rule over the main part. Both parts of the Jajapella kingdom would eventually be lost to the Delhi Sultanate. I prefer the last explanation, as having two colinear parts of the kingdom best explains the wide range in dates on Asala's coins and allows for their overlap with the dates of Gopala and Ganapati. ** ** ** **
## Map 1. Northern India, showing the locations of Narwar, Ranthambhor and Delhi

## ((based on Google Maps, showing modern boundaries and place names) ** ** ** **

## Conclusion

It is interesting that Gopala Deva chose to issue coins in silver, when his predecessors Chahada and Asala issued only copper *jitals*. Perhaps the three specimens we have recorded were commemorative issues, issued to mark a specific event, such as Gopala's coronation, a victory in battle, or a wedding perhaps. This is supported by the metal used for these two coins - silver - which was not used by any other Jajapella ruler. The Narwar  inscription of VS 1339 (1282 CE) mentions Gopala's victory over Chandella king Viravarman (Sircar 1959-1960; 36-37), so it may have been a similar victory that inspired the issuing of the silver coins six years later.

## Gopala Deva's rule probably represented the peak of Jajapella
power. In 1288-89 CE, when they were minted, Delhi was ruled by the weak successors of Balban. But within just a few years, the Khaljis came to power and the power balance shifted. This is reflected in the fact that Gopala's son and successor Ganapati reverted to issuing copper coins. The expansionary Delhi Sultanate under Alauddin Khalji soon put an end to this shortlived independent Jajapella dynasty at Nalagiri. **Acknowledgements** This paper is based on a talk I gave in New Delhi on February 20, 2016. I wish to thank John Deyell for our discussions on Gopala Deva. **Bibliography** Banerjee, R.C., 1920, 'Coins of the Jajapella Dynasty', *Journal and *

*Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, Vol. XVI, Calcutta, pp. 79-84.

Cunningham, A., 1894, *Coins of Mediaeval India*, 1967 reprint, Varanasi.

Deyell, J., 1990, *Living Without Silver*, New Delhi.

Garde, M.B., 1918, 'A Note on the Yajvapalas or Jajapellas of Narwar', *Indian Antiquary*, Vol. XLVII, pp. 241-244.

Roy, P.C., 1980, *The Coinage of Northern India*, New Delhi.

Sharma, S., and Verma, B.P., 2000, 'An Unpublished Silver Coin of

Gopaladeva', *IIRNS Newsline*, Issue 28, Nashik, pp. 5-6.

Sircar, D.C., 1957-1958, 'Two Inscriptions of the Time of Ganapati', *Epigraphia Indica*, Vol. 32, pp. 339-346.

Sircar, D.C., 1959-1960, 'Two Inscriptions of the Time of Gopala', *Epigraphia Indica*, Vol. 33, pp. 31-40.

Tye, R., and Tye, M., 1995, *Jitals*, Isle of South Uist.
# SOME AQ QOYUNLU AND SAFAVID

# COPPER COINS OF JAHROM

** **Seyed Omid Mohammadi and Reza Ghanaatpishe The city of Jahrom in Iran has a long history of minting coins that goes back to the Sasanian era. However, after the Arab conquest of Iran, it took the city a long time to start minting coins again. Although some Aq Qoyunlu and Safavid silver coins of Jahrom are known to numismatists and collectors, no copper coins have been reported until now. Thus, to address this knowledge gap, this article introduces several copper coins locally minted in the city of Jahrom in these periods.**Historical background** Jahrom is located 190 km southeast of Shiraz in Fars province, Iran. Until AH 8 th century, many historical sources briefly described Jahrom using the same information from sources before them, and some talked about its famous handicrafts, including carpets, rugs, and perfumes (Qazwini AH740 (1340): 135). After that, there was a long gap with no mention of the city, and it took some time till Jahrom reappeared in written sources. This time, its palm trees and high-quality dates were mentioned (Majdi AH1004 (1595): 795), which have remained the key features of the city to this day. Sedaghat Kish used the average age of palm trees to estimate that this critical turning point for the city started sometime around AH 800 (Sedaghat Kish 2010: 59).

This date approximately coincides with the rise of Aq Qoyunlu sultans. So, maybe it is not surprising to see that many coins struck in Jahrom were from this period, as something important was probably happening there. Almost all silver coins of this period assigned to Jahrom are countermarked issues with the city's name on them. Examples of these coins from the reign of Aq Qoyunlu rulers Hasan (AH 857-882), Rustam (AH 897-902), and Murad (Album 2555.2, anonymous issues dated AH 906908) have been reported till now (Mohammadi 2021: 11-12; Album 2011: 273).

After that, in the Safavid era, Jahrom-minted coins reappeared. For example, one silver *shahi* dated AH 914 (Baldwin's Islamic Coin Auction 14, Lot 474) and a ½ *pul* (Fig. 1) were both struck by Shah Isma'il I in Jahrom. In the Safavid era, many traders and travelers visited Iran, and one main travel route was from the port of Bandar Abbas to Lar, Jahrom, Shiraz and then Isfahan. This was called the spice trade route, and as Jahrom was situated near it, many foreign travelers visited the city and mentioned it in their books. For instance, travelers reported a stone-paved route in Alborz-Kuh, which was the only way to cross the mountain (Silva Y Figueroa 1614: 106-7; Chardin). In fact, small parts of this road are still intact.

Unfortunately, written sources do not report any facts about the monetary system and coins used in Jahrom. Even after all these years, no copper coins have been assigned to Jahrom, which is odd regarding the importance of trade in this city. Additionally, none of the recent numismatic references reported Jahrom as a Safavid mint either (Diler 2009; Tabataba'i 1976; Ghaeeni 2009). Hopefully, this article will change that by introducing numerous copper coins.

*Fig. 1. Safavid, Isma'il I, AR ½ pul, Jahrom, 2.70 g, 17 mm * *(Zeno #226624) *

**Copper coins** This article presents coins in multiple series that do not necessarily follow a correct temporal order, because most of the specimens have no date or are heavily damaged to the point that no definite reading of the date can be offered. Furthermore, all of them are anonymous, locally-minted coins with no names. Each coin's weight, diameter, and thickness are reported respectively, whenever possible.

The first series bears a legend that reads as **ﻋﺪل ﺳﻠﻄﺎن ﻋﺎدل** / *Adl * *Sultan Adil*, meaning 'the justice of the just king'. On the other side **ﺿﺮب ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Zarb Jahrom* can be seen (Figs. 2 and 3).

* * * * *Fig. 2. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 2.5 g, * *20 mm, 1.4 mm *

* * * * *Fig. 3. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 2.83 g,  *

*24 mm, 1.2 mm * Although these coins bear no date, other specimens with precise dates exist (Figs. 4 and 5). This legend was used on copper coins in cities of Fars province, including Shiraz, Sheikh Murshed (Kazerun), Jahrom, and possibly others, and some known dates are AH 874, 875, 888, and 902. Even though these coins show an exact date, like other civic copper coins of Iran, it is better not to assign them to a specific ruler, because a change in the ruler had practically little to no effect on the design of these local coins. It would suffice to say that these go back to the time of the Aq Qoyunlu rulers.

* * *Fig. 4. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Shiraz, AH 888, * *1.50 g *

*Fig. 5. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Shiraz, AH 902, * *1.42 g *

The coins of the next series are somewhat similar, though this time, the legend is only **ﻋﺪل ﺳﻠﻄﺎن** / *Adl Sultan*, meaning 'the king's justice'. The other side again reads as **ﺿﺮب ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Zarb * *Jahrom*, and bears no date. Two specimens are illustrated in
Figs. 6 and 7 - their design is unique as the legends are written in circles on both sides of the coins. This design, consisting of circles, surrounded by curly lines on one side and straight pointy lines on the other, bears a fascinating resemblance to a shining sun, as shown in Fig. 8. Another fact is that the same sun-like design was used on a similar coin of Shiraz (Fig. 9), which is interesting regarding the great variety that these local copper coins typically have. Similar to the Jahrom specimens, this Shiraz coin bears no name or date either.

*Fig. 6. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 2 g,  * *17 mm, 1.7 mm *

*Fig. 7. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 2.30 g,  * *23 mm, 1.5 mm *

*Fig. 8. Sun-like design used on copper coins *

*Fig. 9. Aq Qoyunlu, anonymous, AE fals, Shiraz * There also exist some tiny coins that only bear the writing **ﻋﺪل**

**ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Adl Jahrom*, sometimes in a very crude style. On the reverse, an unclear spiral design can be seen (Figs. 10 and 11).

*Fig. 10. Anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 0.43 g, 5.9 mm, 1 mm *

*Fig. 11. Anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 0.36 g, 8 mm, 1.4 mm *

Another design to talk about is made up of two intertwined triangles, similar to the Star of David. With a different style, such a hexagram can also be seen on copper coins of Aq Qoyunlu, Uthman, minted in Tabriz. Actually, this design does not often reoccur on Iranian coins. However, like former examples, there is a slight possibility that it can be interpreted as a shining sun here.

Fig. 12. shows **ﺿﺮب ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Zarb Jahrom* written in a hexagram. Also, there is another triangle on the coin's obverse, which, unfortunately, is not readable. The only sure thing about it is a **ش** letter which could be **ﺷﺎه...** / *Shah*..., followed by the name of a king, or **ﻋﺪل ﺷﺎه** / *Adl Shah*, which is a known legend on Safavid coins and countermarks. Additionally, parts of a marginal legend are visible. ** **

The coin in Fig. 13 is also stylistically similar, though this time, only **ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Jahrom* is written on it, maybe because it is smaller and has almost 1/3 rd of the former specimen's weight. Whether these two are connected or not remains to be seen in the future when better specimens come to light.

** ** * * *Fig. 12. Anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 1.52 g, 20 mm, 1 mm *

*Fig. 13. Anonymous, AE fals, Jahrom, 0.57 g, 11.5 mm, 0.8mm *

** ** ** ** * * *Fig. 14. Hexagrams used on Jahrom copper coins * The next category is dedicated to pictorial coins. Fig. 15 illustrates a coin with a strange-looking lion standing right on the obverse and **ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Jahrom* on reverse. Furthermore, there seems to be something on top of the lion, but unfortunately it is hard to define whether it is a word, a part of the design, or even a sun maybe. Fig. 16 is similar, but the nature of the obverse design is not clear.

** ** * * *Fig. 15. Anonymous, AE falus, Jahrom, 4.14 g, 16.5 mm, 2.8 mm *
## 

* * *Fig. 16. Anonymous, AE falus, Jahrom, 4.70 g, 17 mm, 3 mm * Finally, some Jahrom-minted copper coins show the famous lion and sun motif seen on various civic copper coins of Iran, with Safavid and Qajar being the most common. The style of the lion suggests that the following coins are from the Safavid era. The coin in Fig. 17 shows a right-facing lion and sun on the obverse, and **ﺟﮭﺮم** / *Jahrom* accompanied by a date * 1110? * on the reverse, while the one in Fig. 18 has a left-facing lion and sun, with a legend that reads as **ﻓﻠﻮس ﻋﺪل ﺟﮭﺮم** / *falus Adl Jahrom*. Also, it is noteworthy to mention that the full face on the sun is illustrated on the latter coin.

## 

* * *Fig. 17. Safavid AE falus, Jahrom, AH 1110?, 4 g, 17 mm, *

## 2.5 mm

## 

* * *Fig. 18. Safavid AE falus, Jahrom, 4.39 g, 20 mm, 2 mm * To see such a wide variety in the copper coinage of Jahrom is quite remarkable. However, it can be seen that the style in which the mint-name is written differs from one coin to another, and the legend is very crude on some specimens. All these different styles are presented in Table A. * *

## Table A. Different styles of the word 'Jahrom' on

## civic copper coins

**#N** **Ref.** **Style** **#N Ref.** **Style** Fig. 2 2 Fig. 3 Fig. 6 4 Fig. 7 5 Fig. 10 6 Fig.11 7 Fig. 12 8 Fig.13 9 Fig. 15 10 Fig.16 11 Fig. 17 12 Fig.18

## Conclusion

Although no post-Mongol Islamic AE coins were officially assigned to Jahrom before, this article has introduced 12 copper coins minted in this city in the Aq Qoyunlu and Safavid periods. Furthermore, we have analysed and compared the coins stylistically. Hopefully, this will help more specimens come to light in the future. Due to the inferior quality of these coins' minting, their crude styles, and the vulnerability of the copper, most of them are in bad condition, which makes them sometimes easy to miss. **Acknowledgements** The authors would like to thank Saeed Soleimani, who never says no to a scientific discussion about coins, and Ismail Soltani for their assistance. Also, it should be mentioned that most of the coins depicted here are from the private collection of Reza Ghanaatpishe, which is now on display at the museum of Jahrom. **Bibliography** Album, S., 2011, *Checklist of Islamic Coins, * 3rd edition, Santa Rosa.

Chardin, J., *Safarname-ye Sharden Dar Iran \[Chardin's Voyages in *

*Iran\]*. trans. S. Mohammad, Central library and documents centre of University of Tehran, n.d. manuscript written by the translator, no. 4535, Tehran.

Diler, Ö., 2009, *Islamic mints*, 3 volumes, Istanbul.

Ghaeeni, F., HS 1388 (2009), *Sekkeh-ha-ye Dore-ye Safavi \[Coins of * *Safavid Era\]*, Pazineh, Tehran.

Majdi, M. al-Din M. al-Husayni, 1983, *Zinat al-majalis*,  Sana'i, Tehran.

Mohammadi, S.O., and Soleimani, S., 2021, 'Countermarked Arab-

Sasanian Copper Coins of Jahrom', *Journal of the Oriental * *Numismatic Society (JONS)* 243, pp. 8-14.

Qazwini, H.A.M., AH 1004 (1595), *Nuzhat-Al-Qulub: Composed by *

*Hamd-Allah Mustawfi of Qazwin in AH740 (1340)*, trans. G. Le Strange, AH 1362 (1983), Donyaye Ketab.

Sedaghat Kish, J., AH 1389 (2010), *Jahrom Dar Pooye Tarikh \[Jahrom *

*Through History\]*, Farhang Pars, Bonyad Fars Shenasi, Shiraz.

Silva Y Figueroa, D.G.. AH 1030 (1614), *Safarnamah-ye Dun Garsiya *

*Disilva Figurua: Safir-i Ispanya Dar Darbar-e Shah Abbas-e Avval * *\[The commentaries of D. García de Silva y Figueroa on his embassy * *to Shah Abbās I of Persia on behalf of King of Spain\]*, trans. G. Samiee, Nashr-e No, AH 1363 (1984), Tehran.

Tabataba'i, S.J.T., HS 1355 (1976), *Sekkeha-ye Aq Qoyunlu va Mabna-*

*ye Vahdat-e Hokumat-e Safaviyeh Dar Iran \[Coins of Aq Qoyunlu and * *the Basis of the Safavids' Unity in Iran\]*, Shafaq, Tabriz.
# PUCKA PICE IN FATEHPUR DISTRICT

**1839: THE WIDE AND LONG-LASTING** **CIRCULATION OF AWADH'S COPPERS**

## Jan Lingen and Jan Lucassen

The transition from Indian to British colonial currency in India is a messy history. In theory, there is no problem: the allpowerful colonisers modernised and uniformed what they saw as an erratic and primitive currency circulation by hundreds of states and potentates in several steps, the last one being the introduction of the East India Company rupee and its fractions in 1835. In reality, the existing "native" coinage served very well regionally and it took half a century before it could be said that the Imperial currency was the sole circulating medium of exchange. 1

This long-stretched period of replacement of "native" by British currencies and of their co-habitation is a major impediment to reconstruct levels of monetisation and, in particular, of deep monetisation. There is a great lack of knowledge about the circulation intensity of small change, because so far production and circulation figures of the "native" mints in this period have hardly been studied. 2

In fact, we are confronted with three different problems. First is the identification of the Indian mint houses and their production figures outside Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, the capitals of the three Presidencies. 3  Second, to what extent coins were circulating in the very same polity where they were
produced. Those entities were not automatically synonymous, which may sound a bit odd for a modern reader until he or she realises how many US dollars are actually circulating outside the United States. Third, the question at what pace particular "British" denominations (especially of copper coins) replaced "native" ones.

It is difficult to come to grips with these problems unless we have more case studies on the basis of which we can make extrapolations for wider geographic entities. A number of examples of such studies on particular copper denominations from particular mints circulating in particular regions in this transitional period, between say 1800 and 1850, is now available, and this article is meant to add to this. 4 Our starting point here is Fatehpur district, a part of northern India which already since 1801 had been under direct British rule, belonging administratively to the Allahabad Division of the North-Western Province since 1836 (see Map 1).

* * **Working on the Grand Trunk Road: Fatehpur 1839** In the summer of 1839, Lieutenant Fraser, officiating superintendent of the Allahabad-Gursahajganj Division of the Grand Trunk Road (GTR), had to solve the problem of how to recruit a sufficiently large labour force for the improvement of the stretch between Allahabad and Kanpur. 5 This road - the main artery of the Mughal state inherited by the British - was particularly crucial when the alternative of river transport was halted during the dry season. The GTR section between Kanpur in the west and Allahabad in the east is about 100 km long in Fatehpur district.

*Map 1. The "North-Western Provinces" (from G.U. Pope, Text-book of Indian History: Geographical Notes, *

*Genealogical Tables, Examination Questions, London: W. H. Allen & Co., 1880, * *scanned from personal copy and uploaded by Fowler&Fowler, 11:40, 7 March 2009 (UTC)) *

1 Lucassen 2007, p. 366; Garg 2013; Garg 2019. 2 Lucassen 2007, p. 366-367; Lucassen 2018. 3 Stevens 2011; Stevens 2019; for the Madras Presidency, such an overview is still lacking. The Madras Mint itself closed down in 1869.

4 Lucassen 2007; Lingen and Lucassen 2007, 2010/1, 2014. 5  National Archives of India, New Delhi, Military, Military Board Proceedings 31-01-1840, pp. 8915-8925.
According to the estimates, approved by the Military Board in Calcutta, Fraser was supposed to replace the convicts used previously for this purpose, by free labourers. For "ramming and tamping konkur" (modulated limestone - *kankar* - for * * road metal) he wished * * to form 13 gangs of 250 to 300 *bildars * each, for which he needed an advance of no less than 30,000 rupees. The problem was that the Military Board had expected that 3 rupees a month would be an acceptable wage, but on the spot, Fraser found out that this was unacceptably low. After all, in the British cantonments in that part of India, for similar tasks, 3 rupees, 4 annas and 6 pice were paid per month of 30 days. As the task had to be completed in time and "on principle of urgent measures requiring urgent treatment", he decided on his own to instruct his conductor Mr. Taaffe to pay per 1 st July 1839 3 rupees 8 annas each to a gang of 100 *bildars* under the leadership of Faqueer Mahomed.

In a letter to the Military Board, Fraser defended himself for this deviation from the otherwise holy estimates, not only by referring to the prevailing cantonment rates, but also because this way he wanted to "prevent the desertions which have been daily taking place". Besides, he wrote, *"Mr. \[Conductor\] Taaffe has * *sent out into the district to ascertain the price of labour of this * *description between Cawnpore and Futteh Ghur and I myself * *\[am\] making enquiries between the former place and Futtehpore * *but thought not yet in possession of  the information \[...\] that it * *is and even must be in vain to expect that labourers (unless under * *the pressure of want or as a temporary convenience) will accept * *employment on the roads at the District or Cantonment rates * *\[because of\] exposure \[to\] distance from their homes and * *families, the difficulty in procuring and the dearness of the * *provisions, the expense in the erection of huts, the strict * *superintendence and its consequent increased labour"*. 6 We will not follow here this highly interesting case from the perspective of labour history, but come to its monetary implications.

One of the answers to the enquiries of Taaffe and Fraser into the prevailing wage levels in Fatehpur District contains the following information: *"in the Futtihpore District bildars * *receive from 3 to 5 pucka pice per day (the pice at 40 per Rupee) * *but generally 4 pice for good able men employed on heavy * *work".* 7 Here we suddenly receive a glimpse of actual coins circulating for the payment of wages of unskilled labourers. Apparently it concerns a common coin, acceptable also at shops and in market places. The question to be answered now is which good ("pucka") copper coin, equal to 1/40 th rupee, is meant in this context of Fatehpur District in the summer of 1839?

There is no straightforward answer to this, at first sight, simple question regarding a region already occupied for more than one generation by the British, as this article will show. We are therefore obliged to take the following steps. To begin with, we will have to study the copper coins made by the British East India Company in their territories at the time and in particular in Benares (Varanasi). Situated immediately east of Fatehpur District, Benares had been under Company rule since 1775 and from there the British extended their influence in a north-western direction in the beginning of the 19 th century. As we will demonstrate, the answer is not to be found there and we will have to look beyond the Company's territories. So, next we will turn to the copper coins circulating in the "native states" south of Fatehpur in the 19 th century, at the time nominally independent and at best only indirectly controlled by the British. Third, we will turn our eyes to the north for evidence of the existence of *pucka*, i.e. 'good, well-made' copper coins equal to 1/40 th part of a rupee, as mentioned explicitly by Lieutenant Frazer in Fatehpur District in 1839. Finally, we will draw a conclusion and sum up our arguments.

6 Idem, p. 8919 (our interpolations between *\[ \]* ). For the history of wage labour, see Lucassen 2021; for wage labour in India, see Lucassen and Seshan 2022. 7 Idem, p. 8921.

**The introduction of copper coins by the East India Company** **in the North-Western Provinces** In the late 18 th century, Benares district was the most western part of Bengal Presidency. Beyond this, Indians ruled themselves. During the first thirty years of their reign in Benares, the British did not or hardly interfere with the production of coins in the very active local mint house. 8 Only in 1805 did they start to regulate mint production, including copper pice. Initially, until 1808, old coppers circulated at various rates. In December 1809, a regulation was published, authorising copper pice for Benares. The copper coin struck at Calcutta, for circulation in the province of Benares, would be of pure copper and confined to the pice of one size only and with an exchange rate of 64 to the Benares *sicca* rupee. By 1810, the 1809 regulation meant that the old dump pice would no longer be acceptable as currency. However, as no new pice had got into circulation yet, and as after a period of six months 'dump' pice would no longer be accepted, great scarcity was created.

Requests for ample supply of the new pice did not meet the approval of the Calcutta mint committee, who were not convinced that the coins were necessary The Calcutta Council agreed that the minting of copper coins for Benares should cease for the time being, and copper coins produced at Calcutta never got into circulation in Benares. This was the reason that the mintmaster at Benares asked for permission to mint copper pice at his own mint. A lengthy exchange of arguments followed, in which the mint committee bluntly argued that the introduction of the new pice (minted at Calcutta) in Bihar had been successful.

The Collector of Benares, who was in favour of pice being produced at the Benares mint, added the following argument on 30 th November 1811: " *It is universally acknowledged * *throughout the province of Benares that the copper currency of * *a fixed weight, standard and value is particularly wanted, and * *that at present all classes of the community are subject to great * *imposition and extortions from the shroffs and money changers * *in the exchange of silver for pice. Just at the present time the * *rates of exchange of pice in the bazar are from 23 to 23½ tacas * *per rupee (nearly 9 takas less in value than the double pice of * *Government coinage which would be sold at 32 per rupee)*." 9

Finally, in 1815, machine-made copper pice were produced at the mint of Benares, and this continued till the mint was closed in 1830. Apart from the Calcutta mint, three mints in what was later called the North-Western Provinces, still produced copper coins in the 1820s and 1830s, and so in principle, also for Fatehpur district: those of Benares, Farrukhabad and Saugor. When the British acquired the territories to which Fatehpur belonged in 1801, they at the same time became the masters of a number of working mint houses, of which those of Allahabad to its east and Farrukhabad to its west must have been the most important for Fatehpur. Together with most other mint houses, of what was to become known as the "Ceded and Conquered Provinces", Allahabad was closed, but Farrukhabad (200 km from Fatehpur) was continued until 1824. Its copper coin production from 1820 to 1824 must have been substantive, although no production figures are known. Subsequently to its closure in 1824, the Saugor Mint, 300 km southwest of Fatehpur, turned out copper pice between 1827 and 1833 at the value of Rs. 283,388. The production of both mints was meant to be supplementary to that of the mint house of Benares, the capital of Benares district, part of the Benares Division of the same North-Western Provinces as Fatehpur. In total, easily 2 million pieces may have been minted in the three mint houses (Table A). ** **

8 Stevens 2012, pp. 304-411. 9 Stevens 2012, p. 359.
*Table A. British-Indian mints producing copper coins for the * *North-Western Provinces, 1815-1833 * Mint house Production (in Rs) Official weight

| (g | copper) |
|:--- |:--- |
| Actual | weight |
| (g | copper) | Actual weight (g copper) Exchange rate in silver rupees Farrukhabad 1820-1824? 6.48 5.80- 6.47 1/64 Saugor 18271833\* 283,388 6.48 6.11- 6.50 1/64 Benares 1815-1829 1,388,140 6.23 3.03\*\*- 6.76 1/64

* * *Source: Stevens 2012, 333, 379, 404-405, 455, 469, 488, 498. * *\*Saugor opened in 1825 (Stevens 287) and production of coppers * *commenced in 1826 (Stevens 288). The mint at Saugor closed in 1835, * *but mintage figures are only known from 1827-1833. * *\*\*Many contemporary forgeries of these coins exist, most, if not all, * *light-weight coins (Stevens 404). * It may be clear by now that the British started to introduce their own copper coins rather late and hesitantly in this part of India, but most of all, that the copper coin of 1/40 th rupee that Lieutenant Fraser was alluding to as the standard coin for wage payments in Fatehpur district in 1839, cannot be a pice officially coined by the British, because both before and after the introduction of the uniform coinage in 1835, they used coppers of 1/32 nd rupee (the half anna pieces) and of 1/64 th rupee (the quarter anna pieces). Consequently, we have to look for other mints. **Contemporary copper coinage in neighbouring Native** **States, especially in Bundhelkhand** A quick look at the map shows that Fatehpur district at the time was situated in a rather narrow corridor of British territory. North of it was the kingdom of Awadh and south the various principalities of Bundelkhand. For the first half of the 19 th century, there is only scant information regarding the circulation of native copper coins and their exchange rate against rupees, so
we will start our investigation with a much later, but rather complete overview.

The Financial Department Proceedings, February, 1872 provide some inside information regarding the "Manufacture of Copper Coins in Native States" in the North-Western Provinces around Mau Ranipur in the Jhansi District. Immediately striking is the mixture of official mint houses and production centres that imitate actual and antiquated coppers on a large scale. In a letter, dated 6 October 1870, the commissioner G.H.M Ricketts of Jhansi Division (some 200 km west of Fatehpur; see Map 2) wrote to the Secretary of Government, North-Western Provinces: 10 *"2. The Central Provinces have lately been inundated with a * *quantity of copper coin, made chiefly in imitation of an old * *Lucknow coin. Bearing a rude impression of the Lucknow fish; * *but several other native coins have also been imitated and their * *counterfeits circulated. * *3. Police enquiry has shown that these coins are made in * *immense quantities in the Native States and Jagheers all around * *Mow Raneepore (Mau Ranipur). That town is a great mart for * *their purchase, and in and around Mow itself the manufacture * *of these coins has been constantly carried on. Every blacksmith * *and goldsmith in that neighbourhood is a proficient in the trade, * *and coins of any required kind can be purchased by the ton at * *any time in the Mow bazars." *

As far as British territory is concerned, the commissioner regards this practice as illegal and therefore it should be stopped. The major offender, according to him, is Tehree (Orchcha, near Jhansi). The Tehree Chief is permitted to coin, but not to transfer the right. The Commissioner complains further: *"It has been his * *practise to give (or probably to sell) licences to coin to numerous * *dealers in, and makers of coin in his territory, and our existing * *law cannot stop the practise. At present the coin is current for * *very nearly its value as common copper for manufacturing * *purposes. It has no standard value and rises or falls with the * *market rate of the metal."  *

*Map 2. Orchha princely state (1909 Imperial Gazetteer of India, Central India map section) *

10  *India Office Library & Records*, London, Financial Department Proceedings, February, 1872, Mint and Currency, 19, letter no. 408.
According to another letter by J.V. Sturt, Officiating Assistant Commissioner, dated 16 February 1871, 11 the localities where coins were manufactured were said to be: Tori Futtehpore (or dependency of Orcha), Buncoree Orcha, Sursaie Allypore, and Kurrara Gurowlee, but, prior to British rule, they were all manufactured at Mow in the Jhansi District. Orchcha or Tehree and Duttia are the only Native States west of the Dussan river having the authority to coin money. The pice of four descriptions, viz., Pootlee Shaie (Table B, #7) and Nawabee of Lucknow (Table B, #8), Tirsoolee of Nagpore (Table B, #6) and Bala Shaie of Jalaun (Table B, #5) had been extensively manufactured at the aforementioned places for at least 20 years or more, but in former times, prior to British rule, every kind given in the list is supposed to have been made at Mow itself.

According to Mr. Stratton, Political Agent, Bundelkhand, these coins have the impression of the Delhi coin on one side and they are evidently made after that pattern; the other side bears the mark adopted by the District or Government where, or by permission of which, they were manufactured. 12 Finally, Sturt, in his letter dated 9 January 1871, provides an interesting observation that in the Bandah District, the manufacturers avoid the difficulty arising from stamping the pice with any particular mark by making it plain. These are called "chikna pysa".

We have tried to identify the original examples for the imitations made around 1870 in the various mints active in Bundhelkhand, as described by Sturt (Table B and Fig. 1).

* * *Table B. Copper coins current in the district of Jhansi 1870* **No.** **Name of the** **coin** **District** **Remarks** *Tope Shaie * or * * *Mogaolee *

Scindia Supposed to bear the impression of a gun or cannon. *Maharaj Shaie * Gwalior Bearing the impression of a sword. *Lushkuree * or * * *Tirsolee * or * * *Guwaja Shaie * Ditto With a trident.

*Lushkuree * Ditto Serpent's head (specimen not found). *Bala Shaie * Jaloun The mark of a trident. *Tirsoolee * Nagpooree As above, only of lighter weight. *Pootledar * Lucknow Bearing the image of a man. *Nawabee * or * * *Muchlee Shaie *

Ditto Bearing the image of a fish. *Bhopal Shaie * Bhopal Impressed with the word Bhopal, showing year and value. *Katar Shaie * Boondee Kota

Bearing the impression of a dagger. *Soobehdar * *Shaie * Jhansi Bearing the impression of a horse.

* * *Source: J. V. Sturt, Officiating Assistant Commissioner stationed at *

*Mow. Financial Department Proceedings, February, 1872, Mint and * *Currency, 22. *

11  *India Office Library & Records*, London, Financial Department Proceedings, February, 1872, Mint and Currency, 20, letter no. 74A.

*Fig. 1. Possible attributions to actual coins of the ones * *mentioned in Table B *

1. *Tope Shaie* or *Mogaolee*  Gwalior, Daulat Rao Sindhia, 1794-1827, AE paisa (13.22 g), i.n.o. Muhammad Akbar II, struck by Jean Baptiste Filose (1809-1817) at Isagarh.

2. *Maharaj Shaie*  Gwalior, Baija Bai, 18271833, regent for Jankoji Rao Sindhia, AE paisa (8.23 g), i.n.o. Muhammad Akbar II, dated AH 1243 (1827/8).

3. *Lushkuree * or *Tirsolee* or  *Guwaja Shaie* Gwalior, Jankoji Rao Sindhia, 1833-1843, AE paisa (13.44 g), with frozen RY 23.

4. *Lushkuree* with serpent's  head AE paisa (6.29 g). This issue was first struck in VS 1926 (1869) and therefore probably not found when the report was written in 1870.

5. *Bala Shaie*  Jalaun, AE paisa (16.88 g), i.n.o. Shah Alam II, dated RY31 (1788/9). 6. *Tirsoolee* Nagpur, AE paisa (9.34 g),
i.n.o. Ahmad Shah Bahadur. Reduced weight standard of 9 *mashas*, struck by Dr. Gordon during 1823-24. 7. *Pootledar*

Awadh, Muhammad 'Ali Shah, 1837-1842, AE falus (11.95 g).

8. *Nawabee* or *Muchlee Shaie*  Awadh, Amjad 'Ali Shah, 1842-1847, AE falus (11.76g).

9. *Bhopal Shaie*  Bhopal, anonymous coinage of Sikandar Begum, 18441865, AE 1 Anna, AH 1276 (1859/60).

12 The "impression of the Delhi coin" is referring to coins with the impression of the Mughal Emperor in Delhi or to those in Persian script in general.
10. *Katar Shaie*  Bundi/Kotah, AE takka (18.86 g), i.n.o. Shah Alam II, RY 32 (1790).

11. *Soobehdar Shaie*  Jhansi, AE paisa (16.1 g), ND, similar coins with a horse symbol were struck at Sironj, dated AH (1811). How to choose between this bewildering variety of coppers made by official and unofficial native mints? By 1839, most mints in the adjoining Bundelkhand district, which were formerly under Maratha administration, had become inactive. However, popular demand remained, which explains the largescale imitating, or as the British would say: counterfeiting. These coins, also known as *kachcha* coins, will therefore not qualify for the coins that Fraser used. The demand in 1839 for *pucka* pice indicates that these coins must have been produced at a legal mint house, controlled by a well-established administration. We therefore now have to turn our gaze to the north. ** ** **The so-called** ***pucka*** **- pice equal to 1/40** **th** **rupee found in** **Awadh** The third leg of our research trip leads to Awadh, opposite Fatehpur on the left or northern banks of the river Ganga. In order to prepare ourselves properly, let us first try to specify precisely what kind we are looking for when we speak of a copper *pucka*: pice equal to 1/40 th rupee in 1839 in this part of the country. Two clues will point most probably in the right direction: one from Bhopal and one from Bihar.

Traditionally, and as a rule, Indian coins did not bear an indication of their value (more specifically in relation to the silver rupee, the standard coin). Luckily in our period and region there is one exception. That is to be found in the Princely state of Bhopal, southwest of Bundelkhand. Beginning with the reign of Sikandar Begum (AH 1261-1285/ 1844-1865 CE), its minthouse struck copper coins with a value impressed on it: 1 anna ( *ek anna* ) with a weight of ca. 30.08 g, as well as fractions of one half and one quarter anna, weighing respectively 15-15.5 g and 7-8 g. The earliest dates on these coins with an explicit value indication were made in AH 1266 or1849/1850, i.e. 10 years after the year we are investigating.  We therefore conclude that the copper *pucka* pice (= good coin, contra *kachcha * or bad coin), equal of 40 to a rupee, we are looking for, would accordingly be ca. 12.25 g in weight. Which contemporary copper issue would meet this weight and may be the coin referred to?

For a slightly earlier period in this part of India, we know that copper coins, exchanged for 1/40 th to 1/50 th rupee, have been circulating. That was in Bihar and more specifically in Patna, as testified by a paper, published by the Batavian Society of Art and Science (with its site at Batavia, now Djakarta in Indonesia) in its transactions of 1786. 13 Pridmore 1975, p. 197.

*Illustration 1. Exchange rates of cowries, copper pice and *

| silver rupees in Bihar, late 18th century | (Dutch original with English translation) |
|:--- |:--- |
| VI | VERHANDELING |
| DER | MUNTEN, MAATEN |

# VI *VERHANDELING *

# DER *MUNTEN, MAATEN *

# EN GEWICHTEN

# VAN *NEERLANDSCH INDIA*

# VI PAPER ON THE

# COINS, MEASURMENTS

# AND WEIGHTS

# OF DUTCH INDIA

Cowries, a kind of shell, are current in Bengal, according to the quantity: 4 are equal to a Gonda, 20 Gonda is a Ponny, 16 Ponnys a Kaon; usually 60 Ponnys or Cowries are equal to a Sicca Rupee, but this fluctuates sometimes from 50 to 64. In Patna and Bihar 4 Cowries are equal to a Gonda, 3 Gonda a Damerie, 2 Damerie a Tjadauw, and Tjadauws a Peza, of which 40 to 50 are equal to a rupee. *Source: Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap der Konsten *

*en Weetenschappen, Verhandeling der Munten, Maaten en Gewichten * *van Neerlandsch India, MDCCLXXXVI, VI, p. 451.  * Combining these two pieces of information, we obtain the key for solving our question. In the neighbouring kingdom of Awadh, a prolific production of copper coins had been going on since the late 18 th century. Under its ruler Wajid 'Ali Shah (AH 1263-1272/ 1847-1856 CE), an interesting innovation took place. In AH 1269 (1852/53), he introduced a series of copper coins of 1/8, ¼ and ½ paisa, bearing his coat of arms with the sofar enigmatic numerals 3, 6 and 12 added to it. From the transactions of the Batavian Society, it becomes obvious that these numerals must refer to a cowrie-related denomination system (see Table C). *** ***

*Table C. Ratios of damri, tjadauw, paisa and rupee in Awadh, * *c. 1780-1860 * *gonda * *damerie / * *damri * *tjadauw * *paisa * or *falus * *rupee *

1/8 1/4 1/2 1/40-1/50 The cowrie-related exchange rates are also mentioned by Pridmore, who reports that the wages paid by the Company in 1757 ranged from 2 to 5 rupees per month for labourers and craftsmen. For daily or even weekly shopping, enormous amounts of very small value coin would have been required. In these circumstances, the cowrie shell served as an ideal medium for petty transactions and were widely used, well into the 19 th century. 13 We suppose that because of referring to these ratios on copper coins, they must have been rather stable during the last decades of the kingdom of Awadh, abolished in the Indian rebellion against British rule in India in 1857-1859 (called the Mutiny by the British).
# A.

* AE 3 gonda (1 damri or 1/8 falus), AH 1270/ RY 8 (1.52 g) *

B. *AE 6 gonda (2 damri or ¼ falus), AH 1272/ RY 9 (3.04 g.) *

C. *AE 12 gonda (4 damri or ½ falus), AH 1270/ RY 7 (6.04 g) *

# D. *AE falus, AH 1270/ RY 8 (12.09 g) *

*Fig. 2. Copper 1/8, ¼, ½ and 1 falus, struck by *

*Wajid 'Ali Shah, king of of Awadh * Verification of the weight of the copper paisa struck by the later rulers of Awadh shows that the weight of the paisa varies from 11.00 to 12.11 g (Table D). ** ** *Table D. Weights of Awadh pice, 1827-1856 *

**Rulers** **Weights of pice or falus (g)** Nasir al-Din Haidar Shah, 1827- 11.80-12.11

Muhammad Ali Shah, 1837-1842 11.53-11.93 Amjad Ali Shah, 1842-1847 11.20-11.70 Wajid Ali Shah, 1847-1856 11.00-12.00 * * *Source: Kapoor and Master 2018 * 14 Lucassen 2007.

Based on the calculations of contemporary Bhopal coinage, the weight for a copper coin of 1/40 th rupee should be about 12.25 - Therefore, we cannot but conclude that the *pucka* pice referred  to by Lieutenant Fraser in 1839 were the contemporary copper coins of Awadh State, more specifically those bearing the names of Muhammad Ali Shah (Table B, #7) and his immediate predecessor, Nasir al-Din Haidar Shah (Fig. 3). Besides, Wajid Ali Shah introduced a copper currency which shows the denomination on it, based on a prevailing accounting system, and that the Fatehpur District was situated right across the river Ganga as seen from the kingdom of Awadh, and had belonged to that state before the British occupation, all point in that direction.

*Fig. 3. Nasir al-Din Haidar Shah (1827-1837) AE falus, *

*AH1245/ RY3 (11.83 g) * We do not know their production figures, but the frequency of issues, and their wear and tear due to heavy circulation, shows that these coins were widely used and accepted. Even today, they are still relatively common in the collectors' market. We therefore may deduce that the Awadh pice (commonly called 'falus') may have been struck in large numbers. **Summary and conclusion** In Fatehpur district, wages for common workers were paid out in "pucka" pice, valued at 1/40 th rupee. Searching for a concrete coin that qualifies for that description, we had to conclude, first, that this could not have been the official copper pice introduced two decades earlier by the E.I.C., to which this district had belonged since 1801. They went for 1/64 th of a rupee and were therefore simply too light. Neither do the pice made in the various mints in Bundelkhand, south of Fatehpur, because at the time their circulation consisted mostly of irregularly made imitations, which were more heavy than the ones we were looking for.

The pice, produced in Awadh, north of Fatehpur, do, however. This means that the British still, in around 1840, were not able to cater to the demand of copper coins in the parts of India that they ruled directly. It also confirms the result of an earlier study on more westerly parts of the North-Western Provinces. 14 The British-controlled mints of Calcutta, Benares, Farrukhabad and Saugor had not been sufficient to meet the demands of the labour market. Instead, pice, made at official and unofficial "native" mints circulated widely. Witness the use of these pieces in parts lost by that kingdom in 1801, like Fatehpur district (Figs. 2-3). Besides, this went on for the decades to come, as seen by the proliferation of imitations of Awadh pice long after the abolishment of that kingdom (Fig. 4). 15 15 Cf. Wiggins 1978.
# A.

## Typical imitation of Awadh falus (11.65 g)

# B.

## Imitation of AE falus of Wajid Ali Shah (11.20 g)

## Fig. 4. Imitations of copper coins of Awadh, dating from the

*decades after its demise in 1857 * ** ** **Bibliography** National Archives of India, New Delhi, Military, Military Board Proceedings 31-01-1840.

*India Office Library & Records*, * London*, Financial Department Proceedings, February, 1872.

Garg, S., 2013, *The Sikka and the Raj. A History of Currency *

*Legislations of the East India Company, 1772-1835*, New Delhi.

Garg, S. (ed.), 2019, *Monetary Foundations of the Raj*, New Delhi.

Kapoor, M., and Master, D., 2018, *The Nawabs and Kings of Awadh and * *their Coinage*, Mumbai.

Lingen, J., and Lucassen, J., 2007, 'The "mansuri" or "munsoori paisa"
and its use: combining numismatic and social history of India, ca. 1830-1900', *Numismatic Digest* Vol. 31, pp.187-220.

Lingen, J., and Lucassen, J., 2010-2011, "Copper circulation in Northern

India in 1830", *Numismatic Digest* Vol. 34-35, pp.148-183.

Lingen, J., and Lucassen, J., 2012-2013, 'Two lacs of Bharatpur and

Bindrabund rupees and 15 bags of copper pyce, captured at Dig on Christmas' eve 1804', *Numismatic Digest* Vol. 36-37, pp. 157-181; *JONS* 218 (Winter 2014), pp. 24-32.

Lucassen, J., 2007, 'The Logistics of Wage Payments: Changing

Patterns in Northern India in the 1840s', in J. Lucassen (ed.), *Wages * *and Currency. Global Comparisons from Antiquity to the Twentieth * *Century*, Bern, pp. 349-390.

Lucassen, J., 2018, 'Deep monetization in Eurasia in the long run', in

R.J. van der Spek and Bas van Leeuwen (eds.), *Money, Currency and * *Crisis. In Search of Trust, 2000 BC to AD 2000*, London/ New York.

Lucassen, J., 2021, *The Story of Work. A New History of Humankind*, London.

Lucassen, J., and Seshan, R., (eds.), 2022, *Wage earners in India 1500-*

*1900. Regional Approaches in an International Context*, New Delhi.

Pridmore, F., 1975, *The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations, *

*Part 4, India, Volume 1, East India Company, Presidency Series c. * *1642-1835*, London.

Stevens, P., 2011, *The Coins of the Bengal Presidency*, London.

Stevens, P., 2019, *The Coinage of the Bombay Presidency. A Study of * *the records of the EIC*, London.

Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap der Konsten en

Weetenschappen, 1786, *Verhandeling der Munten, Maaten en * *Gewichten van Neerlandsch India*, MDCCLXXXVI, VI, pp. 398-454.

Wiggins, K.W., 1978, 'Tokens imitating coins of Awadh and other
states', *Journal of the Numismatic Society of India*, XL, Parts I & II, pp. 53-79.
# CATALOGUE OF THE COINS OF THE

# BENGAL PRESIDENCY - PART III

## Paul Stevens and Robert Johnston ** **

## Banāras

Special thanks are due to Robert Johnston and Alan DeShazo for help with this part of the catalogue.

**Banāras Mint - Hammered Coinage - Gold, Mohur -** **INO Shāh Alām - 1776 to 1812** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar * *sāya fazl Ilāh hāmī al-dīn *

*muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\]) *ẓarb muḥammadābād banāras * *sanah \[RY\] julūs maimanat *

*mānūs* (= Struck at Muḥammadābād Banāras in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * ** ** **Mohur** **½** **Mohur** **¼ Mohur** **1** **/** **8** **Mohur**

**Official Wt (g)** 10.88 5.44 2.72 1.36 **Wt (g)** 10.78- 10.89 5.42 1.6 but includes
mount **Diam (mm)** 20.9-23.2 14.5-15.0 ~12.5 ~11 **Metal** Gold **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Deno** **m**

# AH **R** **Y** **Differ** **.** **Mark** **s** **Comments** **Rar** **.**

**7.1** - Mohur \[xxxx\] 17? None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>

# N/A

# 7.2 - - "  1192 18 B

RRR **7.3** - - "  \[xxxx\] 19? None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>

# N/A

**7.4** - - "  \[xxxx\] 20? None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>

# N/A

# 7.5 - - "  1193 21 A

RRR **7.6** - - "  \[xxxx\] 22? None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>

# N/A

**7.7** - - "  \[xxxx\] 23? None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>

# N/A

**7.8** - - "  \[xxxx\] 24 None Ref: Senior 1993.

Simplified obverse legend differs from other dates.

# RRR

**7.9** - - "  \[xxxx\] 25? None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>.

# N/A

**7.10** - " 1199 26 D Baldwin (2008), Sale 54 RR

(Diana), Lot 52. **7.11** - " 1199 27 D Normal engraving. No barbels on fish.

# RR

**7.12** - " 1199 27 None Fish with Barbels. No differentiating marks.

# RR

**7.13** - " \[xxxx\] 28 None known but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com>.

# N/A

**7.14** - " 1201 29 A Ref: DNW (2002), Sale 55, Lot 1572.

# RR

**7.15** - " 1202 29 A RR **7.16** - " 1202 30 D Ref: Baldwin (2003), Sale 35, Lot 1704.

# RR

**7.17** - " 1202 31 D Ref: Baldwin (2004), Sale 37, Lot 1531 for coin with complete AH date. Also see photos.

# RR

**7.18** - " 1203 31 D Ref: Baldwin (2005), Sale 40, Lot 985.

# RR

**7.19** - " 1203 32 D Ref: Baldwin (2004), Sale 37, Lot 1532.

# RR **7.20** - " D Ref: Baldwin (2003), Sale 35, Lot 1706.

# RR **7.21** - " D Ref: Johnston RR **7.22** 21 "

# D RR **7.23** 21 " D Ref: Johnston RR **7.24** - Half Mohur 1xx x D Only one known. Edge looks normal.

# RRR **7.24B** - Quarte r Mohur xxx x

D Ref: Zubair Khan. Authenticity has been questioned.

# RRR **7.24**

# A - Eighth Mohur xxx x

Ref: Berlin Museum. Ex Guthrie collection. These are the same type as the RY 24 mohur above.

# RRR * * *Normal style * * * *RY 24 style. shāh * *'ālam bādshāh * *ghāzī sikka * *mubārak  * * * *Fish with barbels *

# (RY 27) ***Banāras Differentiating Marks*** ** ** *Mark A* *** *** *Mark B *

*Mark C* *** *** *Mark C1 with triad of dots * *under fish* ** ** *Mark D * --- Flower may have dots or petals Flower may have dots or petals *Mark E* *Mark F* *** *** *Mark G* *** *** *Mark I* *** *** *Mark J * *Mark K * *Mark L *

*Mark M* *Mark N* Initial marks of mint masters on reverse (noted by Alan DeShazo)

*Be left of RY * *Ye left of RY * Transitory differentiating mark on rupees

(from Alan DeShazo) There is a transitory differentiating mark that has not been recognised, partly because of its being mistaken for being merely a diacritical mark. The operation of the Banāras mint under the EIC was placed under the management of the English Resident during the course of RY 24. The last issue before the transfer displayed differentiating mark A. When control passed to the current Resident, this new mark showed a triad of dots below the fish. A new Resident acceded to mint control and the mark was changed to D (with cross crosslet). *Mark A * *Triad of dots under fish * *Cross-crosslet under fish * *** ***

**Banāras Mint - Hammered Coinage - Silver,**

**Rupee** ***et infra*** **- 1776 to 1812** The set of marks identified by Pridmore as 'darogah's' marks are named 'differentiating' marks here. See above for initial marks of mint masters. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH\])

*ẓarb muḥammadābād * *banāras sanah \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Muḥammadābād Banāras in the 17/\[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * **Rupee** **Half** **Rupee** **Quarter** **Rupee** **Eighth** **Rupee** **Sixteenth** **Rupee** **Official** **Wt (g)** 11.33 5.66 2.83 1.42 0.71 **Wt (g)** 10.85- 11.37 5.40- 5.65 2.63- 2.82 1.30- 1.42 0.65- 0.71 **Diam** **(mm)** 21.3- 24.9 18.1- 21.5 14.8- 17.8 12.6- 14.8 9.7-12.4 **Metal** Silver **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denom AH RY Differ.** **Mark** **Comments** **Rar**

**7.25** 219 Rupee 1190 17 A R **7.26** 220 " 1191 17 A R **7.27** - - "  1191 17 B R **7.28** 221 " 1192 17 A

R **7.29** - - "  1192 17 B R **7.32** - - "  1192 20 A This and all later coins have dual RY, e.g. 17/20. See differ. mark above for a transitory mark (from DeShazo).

# R

**7.33** 222 " 1193 20 A S **7.34** 223 " 1193 21 A S **7.35** - - "  1194 21 A Mitchiner no. 1933 S **7.36** 224 " 1194 22 A

# S **7.37** " 1195 22 A Baldwin (2002), Sale 31, Lot 720.

# S

**7.38** 225 " 1195 23 C S **7.39** - - "  1195 23 A Ref: Johnston, also R
Tandon 2008: 37. **7.40** 226 " 1196 24 A S **7.40A**

" 1196 24 C1 Ref: Alan DeShazo R **7.40C** - " 1197 24 D R **7.41** 227 " 1197 25 D S **7.42** - - "  1198 25 D S **7.43** 228 " 1198 26 D S **7.44** 229 " 1199 26 D S **7.45** 230 " 1199 27 D S **7.46** - - "  1199 27 E Ref: Johnston R **7.46c** - - "  1199 27 F

# R

**7.47** 231 " 1200 27 E S **7.48** " 120x 27 F R **7.49** - - "  1201 28 A

S **7.50** - - "  1201 28 G Ref: Johnston R **7.51** 233 " 1201 29 A **Full die impression** RRR **7.52** 232 " 1202 28 A S **7.53** 234 " 1202 29 A S **7.54** 235 " 1202 30 D S **(7.55)** - " 1202 31 D Ref: HK/Singapore (2003), Sale 36, Lot 450, but no photo. May be 1203?.

# S

# 7.56 236 " 1203 30 D S **7.57** 237 " 1203 31 D

# S **7.58A** - " 1204 31 LMC 4724 (thanks to Alan DeShazo).

# R

**7.59** 238 " 1204 32 D S **7.60** - - "  1205 32 D R **7.61** 239 " 1205 33 D S **7.62** 240 " 1206 33 D LMC 4727 S **7.63** 242 " 1206 34 D S **7.64** 243 " 1207 34 D S **7.65** 244 " 1207 35 D S **7.66** 245 " 1207 35 D **Full die impression** RRR **7.67** 246 " 1208 35 D S **7.68** 247 " 1208 36 D S **7.69** 248 " 1209 36 D S **7.70** 249 " 1209 37 D S **7.71** 250 " 1210 37 D S **7.72** 251 " 1210 38 D S **7.73** 252 " 1211 38 D S **7.74** 253 " 1211 39 D S **7.74C** - " 1211 40 D **Mule** R **7.76** 254 " 1212 39 D S **7.77** 255 " 1212 40 D S **7.78** 241 " 1213 33 D **Mule** RR **7.79** 256 " 1213 40 D S **7.80** 257 " 1213 41 D S **7.81** 258 " 1214 41 D S **7.82** 259 " 1214 42 D S **7.83** 260 " 1215 42 D S **7.84** 261 " 1215 43 I S **7.85** 262 " 1216 43 I S **7.86** 263 " 1216 44 I S **7.87** 264 " 1217 44 J S **7.88** 265 " 1217 45 J S **7.89** 266 " 1217 45 J **Full die impression.** **Diam 29.5 mm.**

# RRR

**7.90** 267 " 1218 45 J S **7.91** 268 " 1218 46 J S **7.92** - - "  1218 46 J **Full die impression.** **Ref: Fitzwilliam** **Museum. Diam** **34.0mm.**

# RRR

# 7.93 269 " 1219 46 J S **7.94** - - "  1219 47 J S

**7.94C** - " 1219 47 K S **7.95** 270 " 1219 47 K **Full die impression.** **Diam 33.3 mm.**

# RRR

# 7.96 271 " 1219 47 L

S **7.97** 272 " 1220 47 L S **7.98** - - "  1220 48 S **7.99** 273 " 1220 48 M S **7.100** 274 " 1221 48 M S **7.101** 275 " 1221 49 N N **7.102** 276 " 1222 49 N N **7.103** 277 " 1223 49 N N **7.103C** - " 1224 49 N No barbels on fish. Ref: Johnston.

# N

**7.104** 278 " 1224 49 N Fish with barbels. They have barbels from this date forwards.

# N

# 7.105 279 " 1225 49 N

N **7.106** 280 " 1226 49 N N **7.107** - " 1227 49 N Copper forgeries exist. N **7.108** 281 Half Rupee 1196 24 A Ref: Johnston RRR **7.109** " xxxx 31 Ref: Ashmolean Museum

# RRR

**7.110** " 1214 41 D Ref: HK/Singapore (2003), Sale 36, Lot 452.

# RRR

**7.111** " 12xx 47 L Ref: Album (2006), List 218, Lot 50809.

# RRR

**7.112** " 12xx 48 L Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 598. Occurs with  different marks. See photos.

# RRR

**7.113** " 1224 49 N Ref: HK/Singapore (2003), Sale 36, Lot 452. No barbels on  fish.

# RRR

**7.114** " 1226 49 N Barbels on fish (after 1224).

# RRR **7.115** 282 Quarter Rupee 1191 17 A Baldwin (2003), Sale 33, Lot 1011.

# RR

**7.116** " 119x 22 A Baldwin (2001), Sale 25, Lot 599.

# RR

**7.117** " 1199 26 D Baldwin (2001), Sale 25, Lot 600. Johnston.

# RR

**7.118** " 1212 40 D Ref: HK/Sing (2003), Sale 36, Lot 454.

# RR

**7.119** " 121x 42 D Baldwin (2001), Sale 25, Lot 601.

# RR

**7.120** " xxxx 43 I Baldwin (2001), Sale 25, Lot 602.

# RR

**7.121** " xxxx 46 J Baldwin (2006), Sale 47 (Stiller), Lot 841.

# RR

**7.121C** " 1219 47 K or L Ref: Johnston RR **7.121E** " xxxx 48 L Ref: Oswal Auctions RR **7.122** " xxxx 49 N Fish without barbels (before 1225). Baldwin (2006), Sale 47, Lot 841.

# RR

**7.123** " xxxx 49 N Fish with barbels (1225 or later). Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 603.

# RR **7.123E** 283 Eighth Rupee xxxx 21 A? Only RY 21 and
earlier have reverse flower to right of RY. Ref: Oswal Auctions.

# RR **7.124**

" xxxx 24 A Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 604.

# RR

**7.125** " 11xx 27 E Ref: Thompson. Also HK/Sing (2003), Sale 36, Lot 455.

# RR
**7.126** " xxxx 28 G Ref: Weir. Also HK/Sing (2009), Sale 46, Lot 1122.

# RR

**7.127** " 1203 30 D Baldwin (2013), Sale 84 (Fore), Lot 1770.

# RR

**7.128** " xxxx 41 D Baldwin (2010), Sale 65, Lot 1699.

# RR

**7.129** " xxxx 43? Ref: Weir RR **7.130** " xxxx 46? Ref: Weir RR **7.131** " xxxx 47 L Ref: Johnston RR **7.132** " xxxx 48 L Baldwin (2006), Sale 47 (Stiller), Lot 844.

# RR

**7.132B** " xxxx 48 M From DNW, Sale 171, Lot 175.

# RR

**7.133** " xxxx 49 N Baldwin (2001), Sale 25, Lot 605. No barbels on photographed specimens.

# RR **7.134** 284 Sixteenth Rupee xxxx 21 A Baldwin (2000), Sale 22, Lot 182.

# RRR

**7.134B** " xxxx 24? Ref: Todywalla Auction 118, Lot 421.

# RRR **7.134C** " xxxx 27 E

RRR **7.134E** " xxxx x8? Ref: Ashmolean RRR **7.134G** " xxxx 47 L Ref: BM 1929.0808.4 (0.7 g, 11.4-12.5 mm)

# RRR

**7.135** " xxxx 49 N HK/Sing (2003), Sale 36, Lot 455. No barbels on photographed specimens.

# RRR

**Banāras Mint - Hammered Coinage - Silver, Rupee -**

**Transitional Type - 1812** This type may have been produced during the period 1810-1812, when the mint was being investigated by the Board of Commissions of the Ceded and Conquered territories. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1229 (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1229.

*ẓarb muḥammadābād banāras * *sanah 17/\[RY\] julūs maimanat *

*mānūs * (= Struck at Muḥammadābād Banāras in the 17/\[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Official Wt (g)** 11.33 **Wt (g)** 10.82 **Diam (mm)** 26.1-26.6 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**7.136** - - 1230 49 Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25

(Wiggins), Lot 608. Probably issued in 1812. This coin may be counterfeit.

# RRR

**Banāras Mint - Hammered Coinage - Silver,**

**Rupee** ***et infra*** **- 1812 to 1815** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\])

*ẓarb muḥammadābād * *banāras sanah 17/\[RY\] * *julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Muḥammadābād Banāras in the 17/\[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * **Rupee** **Half** **Rupee** **Quarter**

**Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.33 5.66 2.83 **Wt (g)** 11.26- 11.32 5.67 2.79-2.81

**Diam (mm)** 21.9-24.0 21.8-22.7 15.0-17.7 **Metal** Silver **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denomination AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **7.137** - Rupee 1227 49 Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 607.

# R **7.138** 285 " 1228 49 Also comes on larger flan (R. Weir).

# R **7.139** 286 " 1229 49 Also comes on a larger flan (Indian coin hoard).

# S

**7.140** 287 Half Rupee 1229 49 RR **7.141** 288 Quarter Rupee 1229 49 R
**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Rupee and** **Half Rupee Patterns - 1815** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1229 (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1229)

*ẓarb muḥammadābād * *banāras sanah 17/\[RY\] * *julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Muḥammadābād Banāras in
the 17 th /49 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

** ** **Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Wt (g)** 11.33 5.68 **Diam (mm)** 27.3-27.5 18.4-19.0 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Grained Left **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. Denom** **AH** **RY Comments Rar.** **7.142** Rupee 1229 17/49 RR **7.143** Half Rupee " " Unfinished pattern

# RRR 7.143. Unfinished half rupee pattern

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver,** **Quarter Rupee Pattern - 1815**

*1229 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1229, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb banāras sanah 17/49 * (= Struck at Banāras in year 17/49)

**Wt (g)** 2.84-2.85 **Diam (mm)** 16.6-19.2 **Metal** Silver

**Edge** Grained Left **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denomination AH** **RY** **Comments Rarity**

**7.144** 293 Quarter Rupee 1229 17/49 Unfinished pattern

# RR

**Banāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Rupee and** **Half Rupee - 1815** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH\])

*ẓarb muḥammadābād * *banāras sanah 17/49 julūs * *maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Muḥammadābād Banāras in the 17/49 year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.33 5.66 **Wt (g)** 11.41 5.68 **Diam (mm)** 26.1-26.4 18.4-19.0 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denom** **AH** **RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**7.145** 289 Rupee 1229 17/49 S **7.146** - - "  1230 17/49 Some doubt about the existence of this coin.

# N/A **7.147** 290 Half Rupee

# 1229 17/49 RR **Banāras Mint - Milled Coinages- Silver,** **Quarter Rupee - 1815**

*1229 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1229, coin *ẓarb banāras sanah 17/49 * (= Struck at Banāras in year 17/49) --- of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

**Official Wt (g)** 2.83 **Wt (g)** 2.83-2.85 **Diam (mm)** 16.6-19.2 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No.** **AH** **RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **7.148** - - 1229 17/49
RR **Banāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Farrukhābād**

**Rupee and Half Rupee - 1820 to 1831** Also issued from the mints of Calcutta, Farrukhābād and Saugor. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH\]) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.68 5.84 **Wt (g)** 11.59-11.73? **Diam (mm)** 25.4-26.7? **Metal** Silver **Edge** Straight Grained

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. Denomination** **Comments** **Rarity** **7.149** Rupee N **7.150** Half Rupee RR **Privy Marks**

* * *Rupee and half rupee. Inverted V on obverse. Bead in centre * *of circle of dots on reverse. *

**Banāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Farrukhābād**

**Quarter Rupee - 1820 to 1831** Also issued from the mints of Calcutta, Farrukhābād and Saugor.

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb banāras sanah 45  * (= Struck at Banāras in year 45.

**Official Wt (g)** 2.92 **Wt (g)** 2.91 **Diam (mm)** 15.6-16.9 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **7.151** 324A R **Privy Marks**

*Quarter rupee. Inverted V on obverse. Bead in centre of * *circle of dots on reverse. *

**Bānāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Trial for**

**Grained Edge on Farrukhābād Rupee - 1822** * * Legend within a plain raised rim * * *namūnah ẓarb banāras *

(= Pattern struck at Banāras). Within a plain,
raised rim * * **Wt (g)** 11.66 **Diam (mm)** 25.4 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

| Pr. | No. |
|:--- |:--- |
| Comments | Rarity |
| 7.152 362 Recorded from Pridmore. | RRR | **Comments** **Rarity** **7.152** 362 Recorded from Pridmore. RRR
**Bānāras Mint - Hammered Coinage - Copper,**

**Pice - 1776 to 1806** My thanks to Robert Johnston who provided much of the information for this listing, including the photos for the obverse and reverse varieties. Differentiating marks appear on many of the known specimens and, where visible, appear to match the marks recorded on the silver coins. Because the coins are very crude and only parts of the design on obverse and reverse are visible, fewer of the marks are usually visible, so these have been recorded differently from those on the silver coins. They occur at the top of the obverse, in the middle of the word *'Ālam. * Coins with AH dates visible are rare. * * *falūs shāh 'ālam * (= Money of Shāh 'Ālam) * *

*ẓarb banāras 48* (= Struck at Banāras \[year\] 48). This
may vary somewhat. See reverse varieties in table. * * **Official Wt (g)** 11.96/10.64 **Wt (g)** 11.29-12.05 **Diam (mm)** 15.7-22.5 **Composition** Copper **Edge** Plain **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No**

# O R AH RY Diff. **Marks** **Comments** ** ** **Rar**

# 7.153 - A I

# A

Official weight of this and the following pice: 11.96 g.

# RR

# 7.153C - A II

# A

# R

# 7.154 294 A II

# B

# S

# 7.155 - A II

# B

# R

# 7.156 295 A II

# B

# S

**7.156C** 295 A II B1 R **7.156E** 295 A II B2 S **7.157** - A II?? None known but see EIC records.

# N/A

**7.158** - A II?? None known but see EIC records.

# N/A

**7.159** - A II?? Wt. reduced to 10.64 g until 1786. No lighter pice are  known but see EIC records.

# N/A

**7.160** - A II?? None known but see EIC records.

# N/A

**7.161** - A II?? None known but see EIC records.

# N/A

**7.162** - A II?? None known but see EIC records.

# N/A

**7.163** - A II?? None known but see EIC records.

# N/A

# 7.164 - A III C

Wt. restored to 11.96 g in 1786. AH may be under  *falūs * rather than to the left as on later coins.

# S

# 7.165 - A III C

# S

# 7.165B 296 A III 120x 28

# D

Different marks below RY - flower, three dots or no symbol. Also, AH may be under *falūs * rather than to the left as on later coins.

# S

# 7.165A - B III 1201 xx

# D No fish on obverse. R

# 7.165E - B III 1202 30

# E

# S

# 7.166 - B III 1203 30

# E Ref: Noble (1995), Sale 48, Lot 2147.

# S

# 7.166A - B III 1203 31

# E

# R

# 7.167 297 B III 1208 35

# E

# S

# 7.168 - B III

# E

Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 650.

# R

# 7.169 - B III 1210 38

# E

# S

**7.170** - B III Pr. Sale, Lot 650. R **7.171** - B III 1213 41

# E

Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 650.

# S

# 7.171c - B III 1214 42

# E

# S

# 7.172 - B III 1218 45

# F

Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 650.

# S

# 7.173 - B III 1219 46

# F

# S

# 7.173C - B III 1222 49 G Star in *sīn* of *julūs* on reverse.

# S

# 7.174 298 B III 122x 49 G

Arrow-like symbol in *sīn* of *julūs * on reverse.

# S

# 7.174C - B III 1222 4P G Retrograde 9 in RY.

# S **Banāras Copper Obverse Varieties**

**Trident** There may or may not be a trident

** ** **A** **B** **Trident** Absent Present

*Obverse A. No trident * *Obverse B. Trident present * ** ** **Banāras Copper Reverse Varieties**

**Muḥammadābād** The word *muḥammadābād* may appear in
the top line, or may be replaced by an ornament **RY** The RY date may be to the right of *julūs*, in the *sīn* of *banāras * or above the *sīn* of *banāras* **Trident** A trident may be present or absent **Symbol** There may be a star or arrow-like symbol in the *sīn* of *banāras*

** ** **I** **II** **III** **Muḥammadābād** Top Line Top Line Replaced by ornament --- **RY** Right of *julūs* In *sīn* of *banāras* Above *sīn* of

*banāras* **Trident** Absent Absent Present **Symbol** None None In sīn of Banāras

*Reverse I. * *Reverse II * *Reverse III. * **Banāras Differentiating Marks for Copper Coins**

# A

# B ***B1***

# B2 ***C***

# D ***E***

***F*** ***G*** **Banāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper,**

**Pattern Double Pice** ***et infra*** **- 1806** Prepared by Yeld in the Banāras Mint (see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com).> *falūs shāh 'ālam * (= Money of Shāh 'Ālam) * * *ẓarb banāras 48* (= Struck at Banāras \[year\] 48) * * **Double** **Pice** **Pice** **Half** **Pice** **Quarter** **Pice** **Wt (g)** 15.35- 15.61?? 1.97 **Diam (mm)** 29.8- 30.5?? 16.1-16.2

**Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination** **Comments** **Rarity**

**7.175** 299 Double Pice Ref: Johnston and BM. RRR **7.176** 300 Pice None traced. N/A **7.177** 301 Half Pice None traced. N/A **7.178** 302 Quarter Pice Specimen in BM. RRR **Bānāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper,**

**Double Pice** ***et infra*** **- 1809** Struck at Calcutta for use in Banāras. None of the coins got into circulation at Banāras, although the pice were exported by shroffs from Banāras for circulation in Bihār.

*sanah julūs 37 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh * (= In the 37th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam) Persian: *do pai sikka*

Hindi: *do pai sikka * (Translation = two pai sikka) **Double Pice** **Pice** **Half**

**Pice** **Official Wt (g)** 12.46 6.23 3.11 **Wt (g)** 13.12-14.46 6.54-7.29 3.02-

3.09 **Diam (mm)** 29.5 24.7 17.5 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denomination Status** **Comments** **Rarity**

**7.179** 303 Double Pice Currency RR **7.180** 304 " Proof Struck from rusty dies. Wt = 14.21?

# RR **7.181** 305 Pice Currency R
**7.182** 306 " Proof RRR **7.183** 307 Half Pice Currency R **7.184** 308 " Proof RRR **Banāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper,** **Pattern Pice - 1813** * * * * *falūs shāh 'ālam * (= Money of Shāh 'Ālam) * *

*ẓarb banāras sanah 49* (= Struck at Banāras in

\[year\] 49) * * ** ** **Double Pice** **Pice** **Wt (g)** 12.95 6.49 **Diam (mm)** 27.0 ~20 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity**

**7.185** 308A Double Pice 49 1228 RRR **7.185A** - - Pice  49 1228 RRR **Banāras Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper,** **Currency Pice - 1815 to 1829**

*sanah julūs 37 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh * (= in the 37th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam). Trisūl. Persian: *yek pai sikka.*

Hindi: y *ek pai sikka. * (Translation = One pai sikka).

Trisūl. **Official Wt (g)** 6.23 **Wt (g)** 4.85-6.76 **Diam (mm)** Varies. See table below **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Status Diam** **(mm)** **Comments** **Rarity** **7.186** 309 Currency 23.2- 25.1 Many different styles. C

**7.187** 309 " " Type with raised rim. S **7.188** 310 " 20.5- 23.2

Neater engraving with plain circle around design. The circle is only clear on those struck off-centre.

# C

**7.189** 311 " 26.5 As previous but larger flan. R **7.190** 312 " 21.5- 24.8

Cross-bar on reverse trisūl. Exists with small flan and small letters.

# C **7.191** 313 Proof 23.0- 24.0 Proof version of the previous coin.

# RR **7.192** - Token? 20.7- 26.3

Countermarked with letter *E*. Shailen Bhandare notes: "The 'E' countermarked copper pice were first published as a group by Dilip Shah several years ago in *ONSNL*. The entire group had originated somewhere in South Mālwa. Undertypes vary."

# RR

## Āgra Mint

**Āgra (** ***Akbarābād)*** **Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Silver, Rupee** Āgra was captured by the British on 18 th October 1803 (AH 1218 RY 46), during the 2 nd Maratha War. Thus, coins struck there after this date must have been issued under the authority of the British. * * Legend that probably reads: *sikka *

*zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z ta'yid ilāh * *hāmī dīn muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin
like the second Lord of conjunctions, by the help of God,

Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam \[AH date\]) *ẓarb mustaqir al-khilāfa * *akbarābād sanah \[RY\] * *maimanat mānūs  * (= struck at the seat of the Caliphate, Akbarābād, in the \[RY\] of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 10.99- 11.05 **Diam** **(mm)** 19.5- 20.8 **Metal** Silver

**Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No.** **AH** **RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.1** - - 47 Ref: Jan Lingen  R **8.2** - - 47 Ref: Jan Lingen  R Earlier dates were struck under Maratha authority.

**Āgra (** ***Akbarābād*** **) Mint - Copper, Shah Alam II - Pice** Shāh 'Ālam legend with AH date Persian legend, possibly as
on Muḥammad Akbar's copper, with flintlock pistol pointing left **Wt** **(g)** 7.11 **Diam** **(mm)** 18.5- 19.9 **Metal** Copper --- **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr.** **No.** **AH** **RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.2D** - - 49 Ref: BM. AH and RY do not correspond.

# R

**8.2E** - - 122x  47 Ref: Oswal Auctions R Pice dated AH 1217, previously listed as 8.2C, are a Maratha issue.

AH 122x/RY44? Dates do not correspond. Not clear if this is a

British or Maratha issue (from Robert Johnston).

**Āgra (** ***Akbarābād*** **) Mint - Copper,** **Muhammad Akbar II - Pice**

*sikka mubārak bādshāh * *ghāzī muḥammad akbar* (= The auspicious coin of the victorious Emperor Muḥammad Akbar) *ẓarb akbarābād sanah \[RY\] *

*julūs * (= Struck at Akbarābād in the \[RY\] year). A flintlock pistol clearly visible. **Wt** **(g)** 5.70- 6.39 **Diam** **(mm)** 16.5- 20.9 **Metal** Copper **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.2G** - - 1 Ref: BM 1903.1009.103 (info from Robert Johnston).

# RR **8.3** - - 1 Ref: Zubair Khan. AH 1216
also published by Album (Sale 18, Lot 1803), but photo shows only one side of coin; 1216 too early for EIC.

# RR ** ** **Allahābād Mint**

**Allahābād Mint - Silver, Rupee - INO Shāh 'Ālam II -** ***Shumshari*** **Type** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH\]). NB Ball and sword. *ẓarb allahābād sanah 26 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= struck at Allahābād in the 26 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 10.76- 11.20 **Diam** **(mm)** 20.8-

| 22.0 | Metal | Silver |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Catalogue | Cat | No. |
| KM AH RY | Comments | Rarity | **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.7** 586 1216 26 *Shumshari* rupee. Ball and sword on
obverse. This was the transitional year. Some would belong to Awadh and some to the EIC. No known difference has been identified.

# R

**8.8** 1217 26 Letter *A* on reverse. Two examples known. RRR

**Allahābād Mint - Silver, Rupee - INO Shāh 'Ālam II -**

**Lucknow Type** Allahābād was transferred to the British from the Nawāb Vizier of Awadh in 1801 (AH 1216). In September 1803, the mint committee sent an account of the coins produced since the mint had been occupied by the British. This showed two types of rupee to have been produced: the 'Lucknow' rupee and the 'Shumshari' rupee. The design of the Allahābād 'Lucknow' rupee is not known. It is possible that they are direct copies of the rupee struck at Lucknow itself, although this seems unlikely. Those rupees (shown below) have the mint-name *Muḥammadābād Banāras.*

* * *Rupee of Muḥammadabad Banāras with no AH date *

* * *Usual rupee of Muḥammadabad Banāras with AH 1218 * **Wt** **(g)**

| ~11.2 | Diam | (mm) |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| ~22 | Metal | Silver |
| Catalogue | Cat | No. | ~22 **Metal** Silver **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Lucknow** **Museum**

**Denomination AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.4** Rupee 1217 26 Some RY must be British? Possible date combinations with RY26 are 1217, 1218 and 1219.

# N/A **8.5** " 1218 26 **8.6** " 1219 26 **-** - Eighth Rupee None 26 Could be Awadh or EIC.

# N/A

Allahābād rupees were also issued by the state of Awadh.
## Barelī Mint

**Barelī Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Silver, Rupee -** **1802 to 1805**

* * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z * *ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh \[AH date\]*

(= Struck coin like the Lord of the second conjunction, by the help of God, Defender of the
faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam \[AH date\]) *ẓarb qita barelī sanah 37 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= struck at the district of Barelī in the 37 th year of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 10.94- 11.13 **Diam** **(mm)** 20.4- 23.4 **Metal** Silver

**Catalogue** **Cat No. AH RY Rev** ** ** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.9** 1216 37 I KM 52.2. Probably the first in the British series.

# S

**8.10** 1216 37 II KM 52.2 N **8.11** 1216 37 III KM 52.3 N **8.12** 1217 37 III KM 52.3 N **8.13** 1218 37 III Ref: Noble (1995), Sale 48, Lot 2173.

# N

**8.14** 1219 37 III N **8.15** 1220 37 III Ref: Noble (1995), Sale 48, Lot 2174.

# N **Barelī Reverse varieties**

**Letter** There are different Persian letters in the *sīn* of *julūs*

** ** ** ** **I** **II** **III** **Letter** *alif * *he * *wa *

*Rev. 1 - alif * *Rev II - he * *Rev III - wa * **Dehlī Mint**

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Shāh 'Ālam II -** **Gold - Type 1, Floral Border** * * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z *

*ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin like the second Lord of
conjunctions by the help of God, Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh

'Ālam \[AH date\]). Surrounded by a floral border

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity). Surrounded by a floral border **Wt** **(g)** 10.55 **Diam** **(mm)** 27.4- 28.2  **Metal** Gold  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

# K **M** **Denom AH R**

# Y **Obv Rev Comment** **s** **Rarit** **y** **8.16** 722 Nazaran a Mohur

# A (ACW )

# I (ACW )

# RRR **8.17** "

# A (ACW )

# I (ACW ) **8.17**

# C "

# B (CW)

# I (ACW ) **8.18** "

|? |? |
|:--- |:--- |
| 8.19 | " |
|? |? | **8.19** "??

See rupees of this type for obverse & reverse varieties.

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād)*** **Mint, INO Shāh 'Ālam II -** **Gold - Type 2, Beaded Border** * * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z *

*ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin like the second Lord of
conjunctions by the help of God, Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam \[AH date\]). Surrounded by a beaded border.

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity). Surrounded by a beaded border. **Wt**

**(g)** 10.7 **Diam** **(mm)** ~35  **Metal** Gold  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

**KM Denomination** **AH RY Comments Rarity** **8.20** 721 *Nazarana* Mohur 1218 46 RRR
**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Silver, INO Shāh 'Ālam** **II - Rupee - Type 1,** ***Nazarana*** **with Umbrella and Jhar** * * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z *

*ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin like the second Lord of
conjunctions by the help of God, Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh

'Ālam \[AH date\]) Surrounded by a beaded border

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) Surrounded by a beaded border

**Wt (g)** ~11  **Diam (mm)** ~27  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat.** **No.** **KM Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity** **8.21** *Nazarana* Rupee

# 1218 46 RR

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Silver,** **INO Shāh 'Ālam II -Rupee - Type 2,** ***Nazarana*** **with** **Umbrella and Cinquefoil** * * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z *

*ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin like the second Lord of
conjunctions by the help of God, Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh

'Ālam \[AH date\]) Surrounded by a beaded border

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) Surrounded by a beaded border

**Wt (g)** 10.92  **Diam (mm)** ~27  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat.** **No.** **KM Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity** **8.21C** B719 *Nazarana * Rupee ** **

# 1218 46 RR **8.22** " 1221 49 Wrongly assigned to Muḥammad

Akbar by KM. **Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Silver, INO Shāh 'Ālam** **II - Rupee - Type 3, Umbrella and Lion**

* * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z ta'yid * *ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad shāh *

*'ālam bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin like the second Lord of conjunctions by the help of God,

Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam \[AH date\])

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at the seat of the Caliphate,

Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 11.17 **Diam** **(mm)** 26.0- 26.7  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.23** 712 1218 46 Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 501.

# RR

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Silver, INO Shāh 'Ālam**

**II - Rupee - Type 4, Umbrella and Cinquefoil** * * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z *

*ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Struck coin like the second Lord of
conjunctions by the help of God, Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam \[AH date\])

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) ** ** **Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Quarter**

**Rupee** **Wt (g)** 11.02-11.44 5.72 2.86 **Diam** **(mm)** 21.7-25.5 ~20 ~17

**Metal** Silver **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

**KM Denomination AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** --- **8.24** 713 Rupee 1218 46 Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 501.

# R **8.25** " 1219 46 **8.25A** " 122x 48 Ashmolean Museum **8.26** " 1221 49 Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 502.

**8.27** 707 Half Rupee 1221 49 Ref: KM RR **8.27C** 704 Quarter Rupee 122x 48 Ref: KM photo RR **8.28** " 1221 49 Ref: KM

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Silver,** **INO Shāh 'Ālam II - Rupee - Type 5 - Floral Border**

* * * * *sikka zad sāhib-i qirān (a)z * *ta'yid ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh \[AH date\]*

(= Struck coin like the second Lord of conjunctions by the help of God, Defender of the faith of Muḥammad, the Emperor Shāh

'Ālam \[AH date\]). Inside a wreath of roses, thistles and shamrocks.

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\]
year of his reign of tranquil prosperity). Surrounded by a wreath of roses, thistles and shamrocks.

** ** **Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Wt (g)** 10.93-11.16 ~5.5 **Diam (mm)** 23.6-28.6 ~20 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Plain **Cat** **No.** **KM Denom AH RY Obv Rev Comments Rarity** **8.29** 714 Rupee 1219 47 A (ACW)

# I (ACW)

Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 503, 504.

# S

# 8.30 " 1219 47 B (CW)

# I (ACW)

Variety B/II has been reported but is probably a counterfeit. **8.30B** " 1220 47 A (ACW)

# I (ACW)

# 8.30C " 1220 47 A (ACW)

# II (CW) Ref: Jan Lingen

# 8.31 " 1220 47 B (CW)

# I (ACW) See Baldwin (2007), Sale 53, Lot 2078.

# 8.32 " 1220 48 A (ACW)

# I (ACW)

See Baldwin (2008), Argentum Sale 8 th Nov, Lot 685.

# 8.33 " 1220 48 A (ACW)

# II (CW)

# 8.33C " 1220 48 B (CW)

# I (ACW)

# 8.34 " 1220 48 B (CW)

# II (CW)

# 8.34A " 1220 48 C II (CW)

Half the flowers on the obverse go one way, and the other half go the other. Some doubt the authenticity of this one.

# 8.34C " 1221 48 A (ACW)

# I (ACW)

# 8.35 " 1221 48 A (ACW)

# II (CW) Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 504.

# 8.35A " 1221 48 A (ACW)

# III

# 8.35C " 1221 48 B (CW) III Some of the
flowers on the reverse go one way, and others go the other. **8.36** Half Rupee

# 1219 47 A (ACW)

# I (ACW) Baldwin (2007), Sale 50, Lot 1061.

# RR

# 8.36D " 1221 xx? II (CW)

** ** **Obverse Varieties** **Direction of** **Wreath** The wreath may go clockwise or anticlockwise ** ** **A** **B** **C** **Direction of** **Wreath** Anticlockwise

# (ACW) Clockwise

# (CW) Half one way and half the other

*A - Wreath anticlockwise* ** ** *B - Wreath clockwise * *C - Half one way and half the other * **Reverse Varieties** **Direction of** **Wreath**

The wreath may go clockwise or anticlockwise ** ** **I** **II** **III** **Direction of** **Wreath** Anticlockwise

# (ACW) Clockwise

# (CW) Mostly anticlockwise, but from about 9-11 o'clock --- the leaves go clockwise

*Wreath anti-clockwise * *Wreath clockwise * * *

*Mostly anti-clockwise, but from about 9-11 o'clock the * *leaves go clockwise *

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Copper,** **INO Shāh 'Ālam II**

* * * * *falūs shāh ālam shāhī* (= *falūs * of Shāh 'Ālam the king) with a sun face in the *seen* of *falūs*

*ẓarb shāhjahānābād  * (= struck at Shāhjahānābād) **Wt** **(g)** 11.64  **Diam**

**(mm)** ~22?  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

| Catalogue | Cat | No. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| KM Denom AH RY | Comments | Rarity |
| 8.36C 700var | Pice | 1221 48 Whether or not this is | **KM Denom AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.36C** 700var Pice 1221 48 Whether or not this is truly a *nazarana* is debatable.

# S

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint - Copper,** **INO Shāh 'Ālam II**

* * * * *falūs shāh ālam shāhī* (= *falūs * of Shāh 'Ālam the king)

*ẓarb shāhjahānābād  * (= struck at Shāhjahānābād) **Wt** **(g)** 12.05- 12.43 **Diam** **(mm)** 19.3- 20.9 **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM Denom AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.36E** 700 Pice 1219 47 S **8.36G** " 1220 48 **8.36i** 1221 49

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Muḥammad Akbar II** **- Gold - Type 1** (Colour added)

* * *muḥammad akbar shāh * *bādshāh ghāzī sāhib-i qirān * *thani sikka mubārak \[AH *

*date\]  * (= Auspicious coin of Emperor Muḥammad Akbar the warrior, the second Lord of conjunctions \[AH date\])

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)**?  **Diam (mm)** ~28  **Metal** Gold  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

**KM Denomination AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.37** 783 *Nazarana * Mohur

# 1221 1 RRR 8.38 " 1234 12
**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Muḥammad Akbar II** **- Gold - Type 2**

* * * * *muḥammad akbar shāh * *bādshāh ghāzī sāhib-i qirān * *thani sikka mubārak \[AH * *date\] * (= Auspicious coin of Emperor

Muḥammad Akbar the warrior, the second Lord of conjunctions \[AH date\])

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 10.66- 10.73 **Diam** **(mm)** 19.6- 20.2  **Metal** Gold  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

**KM Denomination AH** **RY** **Comments Rarity** **8.39C** 781 Mohur 12xx ( *ahd* )

# RR **8.40**

" 122x **8.41** " **8.41C** " **8.41D** " **8.42** " **8.42C** " 1237 17 **Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Muḥammad Akbar II** **- Silver - Type 1**

* * * * *muḥammad akbar shāh * *bādshāh ghāzī sāhib-i qirān *

*thani sikka mubārak \[AH * *date\] * (= Auspicious coin of Emperor Muḥammad Akbar the warrior, the second Lord of conjunctions \[AH date\])

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 10.92- 11.44 **Diam** **(mm)** 28.5- 28.7  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

**KM** **Denom** **AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.43C** 779.1 *Nazarana* Rupee

# 1221 1 RR **8.43**

" 1223 3 **8.44** " 1224 3 **8.45** " 1225 4 One specimen has an oblique milled edge.

**8.46** " 1226 5 **8.47** " 1227 6 **8.48** " 1227 7 **8.48D** " 1231 11 Berlin Museum. Ex Guthrie.

**8.48F** " 1232 12 **8.49** " 1235 15 **8.50** " 1236 16 **8.51** " 1237 17 **8.51C** " 1238 18 **8.52** " 1239 19 **8.53** " 1240 20 **8.54** " 1241 21 **8.55** " 1242 22 **8.55B** " 1244 24 **8.55C** " 1245 25 Berlin Museum. Ex Guthrie (via Bhandare). **8.55E** " 1246 26 Berlin Museum. Ex Guthrie (via Bhandare). **8.55G** " 1247 27 Berlin Museum. Ex Guthrie (via Bhandare).

**8.56** " 1248 28 **8.57** " 1249 29 **8.58** " 125x 30 **8.59** 779.2 " 1251 31 Not sure why KM gives these last two a different number.

# RR **8.60** " 1252 32

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Muḥammad Akbar II**

**- Silver - Type 2** These coins exist in three styles: a normal 22-24 mm type with part of the design off the flan; a larger broad-flan rupee with almost full flan, scarcer than the smaller flan type; and rare *nazarana* strikes with a diameter of approximately 28-29 mm (see above). The first and second styles are combined in the listings below.

* * * * *muḥammad akbar shāh * *bādshāh ghāzī sāhib-i qirān *

*thani sikka mubārak \[AH * *date\] * (= Auspicious coin of Emperor Muḥammad Akbar the warrior, the second Lord of conjunctions \[AH date\])

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) --- **Rupee** **Half** **Rupee** **Quarter** **Rupee** **Eighth** **Rupee** **Wt (g)** 11.03- 11.22 5.58 2.6-2.75 1.4 **Diam** **(mm)** 21.7-27.7 ~19 ~17 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

**KM Denom** **AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.61** 777 Rupee 1221 1 Coins may have slightly different symbols.

# S

**8.62** " 1222 1 **8.63** " 1222 2 **8.64** " 1223 2 **8.65** " 1223 3

**8.66** " 1224 3 **8.66A** " 1224 4 **8.67** " 1225 4 **8.67A** " 1225 5 Ref: Baldwin (2013), Sale 84 (Fore), Lot 1093.

**8.68** " 1226 5 **8.68A** " 1226 6 Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 26, Lot 1494.

**8.69** " 1227 6 **8.70** " 1227 7 **8.71** " 1228 7 **8.72** " 1228 8 **8.73** " 1229 9 **8.74** " 12xx 11 **8.75** 775 Half Rupee

# 1221 1 RR

**8.76** " 1225 4 **8.76C** " 1229 9 **8.77** 773 Quarter Rupee xxxx 1 RR

# 8.77C " xxxx 6 **8.78** " 122x 7 **8.78D** - - Eighth Rupee xxxx 6 RR

**8.78E** - - "  xxxx 7 Some of the rupees of the early years are struck on broad flans without being *nazaranas*.

**Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Muḥammad Akbar II** **- Copper**

* * * * *falūs shāh akbar shāh  * (= Copper coin of Shāh Akbar Shāh)

*ẓarb shāhjahānābād  * (= struck at Shāhjahānābād). * *

*S* by RY. **Pice** **Half Pice** **Wt (g)** 11.00-11.55 5.15

**Diam (mm)** 18.4-22.0 27.0-27.4 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity**

**8.78G** 770 Pice 1222 1 No *S* by RY. S **8.78H** " 1222 2 No *S* by RY.

**8.79** 771 " 1225 4 S **8.80** " 1225 5 **8.81** " 1226 5 **8.82** " 1226 6 **8.83** " 1230 9 **8.84** " 1231 10 **8.84C** " 1232 11. **8.85** " 1232 12 **8.86** " 1233 12 **8.87** - - Half Pice?  1225 5 Broad thin flan. RRR **Delhi (** ***Shāhjahānābād*** **) Mint, INO Bahādur Shāh II -** **Gold** * * * * *abū al-muẕaffar siraj al-dīn *

*muḥammad bahādur shāh * *bādshāh ghāzī* (= Father of the victorious, of the religion, Emperor Muḥammad Bahādur Shāh, the warrior)

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt (g)** 10.9  **Diam** **(mm)**?  **Metal** Gold  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity** **8.87C** *Nazarana* Mohur

# 1255 3 RRR

**Delhi (Shāhjahānābād) Mint, INO Bahādur Shāh II -** **Silver** --- *abū al-muẕaffar siraj al-dīn *

*muḥammad bahādur shāh * *bādshāh ghāzī* (= Father of the victorious, of the religion, Emperor Muḥammad Bahādur Shāh, the warrior)

*ẓarb dār al-khilāfa * *shāhjahānābād \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at
the seat of the Caliphate, Shāhjahānābād, in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt** **(g)** 11.02-

11.44 **Diam** **(mm)** 27.0  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity** **8.88** *Nazarana* Rupee

# 1253 1 RRR

**8.89** " 1254 2 **8.90** " 1255 3 **8.91** " 1256 4 **8.92** " 1257 5 **8.93** " 1258 6

## Farrukhābād Mint

**Farrukhābād Mint - Silver, Nazarana Double Rupee -** **Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - 1803/4** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\])

*ẓarb aḥmadnagar * *farruckābād sanah \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at

Aḥmadnagar Farrukhābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity). * *

**Wt (g)** 22.15  **Diam (mm)** 37  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denom AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.95** - - Double Rupee 1218 39 ***Nazarana*** **.** Ref: Baldwin
et al (2006), New York Sale XI, Lot 619. Believed only two known.

# RRR

**Farrukhābād Mint - Silver, Rupee - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II -**

**1802 to 1806** Local style continued after the British took over. In the style of the Bangash Nawābs of Farrukhābād. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\])

*ẓarb aḥmadnagar * *farruckābād sanah \[RY\] *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Aḥmadnagar

Farrukhābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * **Wt** **(g)** 10.7511.14g **Diam** **(mm)** 23.5- 26.3  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denomination AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.94** - - Rupee  1217 39 Handover occurred in this year.

# S **8.96** - - "  1218 39 One described as *nazarana*.

**8.97** - - "  1219 39 **8.98** - - "  1220 39 **8.98C** - " 1222 39 Ref: Ashmolean Museum

# N/A **8.99** - - "  1224 39 Dates not seen
but reported in KM. Assume RY 39, but all dates after 1220 seem peculiar.

**8.100** - - "  1225 39 **8.101** - - "  1227 39 **8.102** - - "  1228 39

**Farrukhābād Mint - Silver, Rupee and Half Rupee -**

**Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - 1806 to 1819** Also struck at Calcutta and Banāras. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya faz ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad,

Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.21 5.60 **Wt (g)** 11.20-11.24? **Diam (mm)** 26.4-27.5 ~20 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Grained Right --- **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denom Status** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.103** 340 Rupee Pattern No dot mark. Edge GL.

May have been struck at Calcutta before being sent to Farrukhābād.

# RRR

**8.104** 341 " Pattern Smaller flan (25.9 mm). Edge GR.

# RRR

**8.105** 314 " Currency Forgeries occur, often in copper or brass.

# C **8.106** 315 Half Rupee Currency RR See also Calcutta Mint. **Secret Marks for Farrukhābād**

*Rupee and half rupee: extra dot on obverse. No dot on * *reverse. *

**Farrukhābād Mint - Silver, Quarter Rupee -** **Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - 1806 to 1819**

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb farrukhābād sanah 45 * (= Struck at Farrukhābād in year 45) **Wt** **(g)** 2.782.79  **Diam** **(mm)** 16.5- 17.8  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Status** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.107** 316 Currency R See also Calcutta Mint. **Secret Marks for Farrukhābād**

*Quarter rupee: dot in centre of circle on reverse. No * *inverted V on obverse. *

**Farrukhābād Mint - Weight for Farrukhābād Rupee -** **1806 to 1819 - Type 1** **'Minimum** **legal Wt** **of oblique** **-** **- milled old** **Fur.** **Rupee** ***171.198*** ***grs'*** * * Legend and Wt in a hexagon formed with double lines Blank

**Official Wt (g)** 11.09 (171.198 grains) **Wt (g)** 11.05

| 30.2 | Metal |
|:--- |:--- |
| Copper | Edge |

**Farrukhābād Mint - Weight for Farrukhābād Rupee -** **1806 to 1819 - Type 2** **'Minimum**

**legal Wt** **of oblique -** **- milled old** **Fur Rupee'** Legend within a square formed with
double lines. Above is the Wt, below the units: *172.35 * *grs* Legend in Persian within a square formed with double lines

**Official Wt (g)** 11.16 (172.35 grains) **Wt (g)** 11.11 **Diam (mm)** 26.4 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.109** S **8.110** - - Star below square on the reverse.

**Farrukhābād Mint - Silver, Rupee** ***et infra*** **-**

**Shāh** **'** **Ālam II- 1820 to 1824** Also struck at Calcutta, Banāras and Saugor. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya *

*fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh* (= Defender
of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity.) * *

**Rupee** **Qrtr. Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.68 2.92 **Wt (g)** 11.61-11.64 2.90 **Diam (mm)** 25.2-26.0 16.7-17.1 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Straight Grained
**Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No. Denomination** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.111** Rupee C **8.112** Quarter Rupee RR Quarter rupee, Cat No 8.112 **Privy Marks** Rupee - dot at bottom of obverse

Quarter Rupee - dot in centre of group at bottom
of reverse **Farrukhābād Mint - Weight for Farrukhābād Rupee -** **1820 to 1824** **'Min. wt.** **of new Stand.** **Furukh** **d** **.** **Rupee** **\[straight-** **milled,** **and plain**

**edged\]** **178.12 grs.'** ** ** The legend and weight within a plain raised rim Blank

**Official Wt (g)** 11.54 (178.12 grains) **Wt (g)** 11.44-11.53 **Diam (mm)** 26.5 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No. Rev** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.113** - - I  Reverse blank S **8.114** - - II  Reverse countermark **Farrukhābād Rupee Weight Varieties** I - Blank II - Countermark, MC \*, on
reverse **Farrukhābād Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Copper,**

**Falūs - 1802 to 1806** The records contain no specific mention of copper coins being struck immediately after the Farrukhābād mint was acquired by the EIC, but rare examples of falūs (or pice) exist, with dates that correspond to the early years of British occupation. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\])

*ẓarb aḥmadnagar * *farruckābād sanah \[RY\] *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Aḥmadnagar

Farrukhābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Falūs** **Half Anna** **Wt (g)** 7.41? **Diam (mm)** 23.6-24.2? **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM Denom AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.115** 20 Falūs 1219 39 Valentine 1914: 102 RRR **8.116** Falūs 1220 39

Half Anna 1233/12 (from Valentine, p. 102, no. 91). May be EIC but more likely struck by a local ruler.

**Farrukhābād Mint - Copper, Pattern Pice 1806** * * The value in three
languages: Bengali: *ek pai sikka*. Persian: *Yek pai sikka*.

Hindi: *ek pai sikka*. (Translation of all languages = One pai sikka). * * *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity). * * --- **Wt** **(g)** 6.22- 6.73 **Diam** **(mm)** 26.2- 26.5  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.117** RRR **Farrukhābād Mint - Copper, Currency Pice - 1806** Not certain that this coin was ever struck. A possible example is illustrated below. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\]) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Wt (g)** 18.3-18.8 (290 grains) **Diam (mm)** ~26.5 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain or GR? **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.118** - - Pice  Not certain if this really represents this coinage. See <https://www.psIndianCoins.com.>

# N/A

**Farrukhābād Mint - Copper, Double Pice** ***et infra*** **1816**

*sanah julūs 45 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= In the 45 th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam)

Value in three languages: Bengali, Persian, Hindi: *ek *

*pai sikka* (= one pai sikka) OR *do pai sikka* (= two pai
sikka) **Double Pice** **Pice** **Wt (g)** 12.66 6.41-6.84 **Diam (mm)** 28.1-28.5 22.5-24.9 **Metal** Copper

**Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denomination** **Comments** ** ** **Rarity**

**8.119** Double Pice RR **8.120** 335A Pice RR **Farrukhābād Mint - Copper, Pice - 1820 to 1824** Numerous different sizes and shapes of trident exist - also contemporary forgeries. It is not certain when these coins were struck, since the records indicate that no copper coins were struck between 1820 and 1824. * * *sanah julūs 45 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= in the 45 th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam) Value in Persian and Hindi: *ek pai sikka* (= one pai sikka) **Wt** **(g)** 5.80- 6.47 **Diam** **(mm)** 21.6- 24.0  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. Axis** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.121** ↑↑ C **8.122** ↑↓ R **8.122A** $$ ↑\to $$ S

Cat No 8.122. Axes ↑↓ (NB notch in edge of coin to determine axis from photo)

## Gwāliār Mint

**Gwāliār Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Silver, Rupee -** **1802 to 1806** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar * *sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn *

*ẓarb gwāliār sanah 46 julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= struck at --- *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\]) Gwāliār in the 46 th year of tranquil prosperity) **Wt (g)** 10.92-11.10  **Diam (mm)** 20.2- 21.4  **Metal** Silver

**Catalogue** **Cat No. AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.123** 1218 46 The straight sword is said to represent a British officer's sword.

# S

**8.123C** 1220 47 Ref: Oswal Antiques (2017), Auction 69, Lot 427.

# R

**Gwāliār Mint - Shāh 'Ālam II - Copper, Pice -** **1802 to 1806**

**Wt (g)** 9.49 **Diam (mm)**? **Metal** Copper **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

# AH RY **Comments** **Rarity** **-** - xxxx 46? Ref: Bombay Auctions. More
specimens are needed to confirm this catalogue entry. It could be a copper core for a rupee forgery?

# R **Hāthras Mint** No EIC coins known **Najībābād Mint** No EIC coins known

## Sahāranpūr Mint

**Sahāranpūr Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Silver, Rupee -** **1803  to 1806** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the *ẓarb dār al-sar̄ur sahāranpūr * *sanah \[RY\] julūs maimanat *

*mānūs* (= Struck at dār alSarur Sahāranpūr in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\]) **Wt** **(g)** 10.94- 11.10 **Diam** **(mm)** 21.8- 27.0  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **KM AH RY Rev** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.124** - - 1218 45  I Nominally under control of EIC from 1803/1218-9. Ref: KM 692 (p. 58)

# S

# 8.125 - - 1218 45  II

S **8.126** 692 1218 45 III St. Stephen's cross on reverse.

# R

**8.127** 693 1218 45 IV S **8.128** - - 1219 46  - - See Baldwin (2001), Sale 25  (Wiggins), Lot 345.

# S

**8.129** 694 1220 47 - - Ref: KM 694 (p. 58). Also  photo published on eBay.

# S

**-** - - 1220 49 - - Ref: KM 694 (p. 58). The  mint was definitely closed before this. This coin may not have been struck at Sahāranpūr or the mint was briefly reopened? Perhaps a mistake for 47?

# N/A **Sahāranpūr Reverse varieties**

**Symbol next to RY** The symbol to the left of the RY varies

# **I** **II** **III** **IV** **Symbol next to RY** *Rev I * *Rev II * * * *Rev III also has the  *

*St. Stephen's cross * *prominently displayed* *Rev IV*

**Sahāranpūr Mint - Shāh 'Ālam II, Copper - Type 1,** **Double Pice - 1803**
* * * * *falūs 'ālam* s *hāhī 1218* (= Copper coin of Shāh 'Ālam 1218) in centre line

*ẓarb sahāranpūr sanah 45* (= Struck at Sahāranpūr in the 45 th year) in centre line **Wt** **(g)** See below **Diam** **(mm)** 21  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **MW KM AH RY Wt** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.131** T3p 1218 45 16.65

# R **8.132** - - 690 1218 45 12.9- 13.8

Ref: KM 690 (p. 58). KM call this a pice. Their coin has a St Stephens cross to left of RY.

# RR

**Sahāranpūr Mint - Shāh 'Ālam II, Copper - Type 2,** **Pice - 1803**
falūs 'ālam shāhī 1218 (= Copper coin of Shāh 'Ālam 1218. in centre line

*ẓarb sahāranpūr sanah 45* (= Struck at Sahāranpūr in the 45 th year)
in centre line **Wt (g)** 7.7  **Diam (mm)** 18  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No. MW AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.133** T3t 1218 45 RR

## Saugor Mint

**Saugor Mint - Hammered - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Silver,**

**Rupee** ***et infra*** **- 1818 to 1819 - Type 1** The RY 55 coins were copied at Gurrah Kotah. These copies might be distinguished by their crude nature, although this is stated to be difficult to do so. The RY 55 coins struck by the Marathas at Saugor cannot be distinguished from those struck by the British. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya *

*fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\]) *ẓarb ravishnagar sāgar sanah * *55 julūs maimanat mānūs*

(= Struck at Ravishnagar Saugor in the 55 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

** ** **Rupee** **½ Rupee** **¼ Rupee** **Wt (g)** 10.92- 11.08 ~5.5 ~2.7

**Diam (mm)** 20.0-20.4 ~16 ~12 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

# MW. **No.** **Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity** **8.134** T3 Rupee? 55 Slight
differences in reverse ornaments between these two, particularly the presence of a cross on 8.135.

# C/S **8.135** T3a "?

**8.135C** T3a Half Rupee? RR **8.136** T3 Quarter Rupee? RR See also Garhakota mint of the Scindias and coins of the Marathas at <https://www.psIndianCoins.com.>

**Saugor Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Hammered - Silver,**

**Rupee - 1819 - Type 2** Issued to try to prevent the copying of the Saugor rupee at Gurrah Kotah. The coins have Saugor on the obverse and 1819 on the reverse. This coin was first reported by Prashant Kulkarni (1988-1989: 119-122). *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh Saugor* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp
on the seven climes, "Saugor" in crude English letters)

*ẓarb ravishnagar sāgar * *sanah 55 julūs maimanat *

*mānūs* (= Struck at Ravishnagar Saugor in the

55 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity). "1819" in English, above the word *julūs.*

**Wt (g)** 10.9 **Diam (mm)** 19-20 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **MW.** **No.** **AH RY** **Comments** **Rarity**
**8.137** T4? Ref: HK/Singapore (1997), Sale 25, Lot 676.

# RRR

**Saugor Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Hammered - Copper,**

**Pice - 1818 to 1819 - Type 1** If copper coins were issued from the old Saugor mint during the time that the British kept it operating, then these would have been dated RY 55. However, the exact style is not known. They could be identified by their Hijri dates (1234 or later). Of the two coins shown below, the Hijri date on the top coin is not clear and that on the bottom coin appears to be 1230 (and therefore not EIC).

** ** **Takka** **Pice** **Wt (g)** ~15 ~12 **Diam (mm)** ~20? **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.**

# MW. **No.**

**Denomination AH RY Obv** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.138** T5d Takka? 55 A S **8.139** T5e "? 55 B **8.140** T5f "? 55 C **8.141** T5j Pice? 55 S **Saugor Obverse Varieties for Takkas**

**Symbols on Obverse** The symbols on the three lines of the
obverse vary, particularly those in the middle line

# **A** **B** **C** **Symbols on Obverse** **Saugor Mint - Hammered - Copper,**

**Pice - 1826 - Type 2** Kulkarni first reported this coin, which is distinguished particularly by the reverse legend.

* * * * *sanah julūs 45 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= in the 45 th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam) * *

*ek pai sa (or sata) masa* (= This coin weighs seven
mashas) * * **Official Wt (g)** 6.80? **Wt (g)** 6.23-6.52 **Diam (mm)** 19.9-22.3 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **8.142** See Kulkarni P., SNC March 1985, p. 40. RRR **Saugor Mint - Milled - Silver, Rupee - 1820 to 1831** See Pridmore, p. 257-258. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\]) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in his 45 th year of tranquil prosperity) ** ** **Rupee** **Half** **Rupee** **Quarter**

**Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.66 5.83 2.91 **Wt (g)** 11.67?? **Diam (mm)** 24.7-25.1 ~23 ~17 **Metal** Silver **Edge** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.143** 325 Rupee Distinguished from rupees struck at other mints by the absence of privy marks.

# N

**8.144** - Half Rupee None found but referred to in India Office records (IOR).

# N/A

**8.145** - Quarter Rupee None found but referred to in

# IOR.

# N/A
**Saugor Mint - Milled - Copper, Pice - 1826 to 1835** See Pridmore, pp. 259-260.

*sanah julūs 45 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= In the 45 th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam) The value in two languages:

Bengali: e *k pai sikka.* Persian: y *ek pai sikka.*

(Translates as one pai sikka). N.B. trisūl in Persian
inscription. **Official Weight (g)** 6.48 **Actual Weight (g)** 6.11-6.50 **Actual Diameter (mm)** 21.5-24.1 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Obverse** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.146** 337 A Trident in *sīn* of *julūs.* S **8.147** 338 B Rosette in *sīn* of *julūs.* See <https://www.psIndianCoins.com> for further comments.

**8.148** 339 C Spiky rosette in *sīn* of *julūs.* **Obverse Varieties** A B C **Sohagpur Mint**

**Sohagpur Mint - Shāh** **'** **Ālam II - Silver, Rupee**

* * *sikka mubārak bādshāh * *ghāzī shāh 'ālam * (= The
auspicious coin of the victorious Emperor Shāh Ālam)

*...sanah \[RY\] julūs * *maimanat mānūs* (= \[ẓarb Sohagpur?\] in the \[RY\] year of tranquil prosperity)

**Wt (g)**?  **Diam (mm)** ~25  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain ** ** **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **RY** **Comments** **Rarity**

**8.149** - - 2x Only known coins (2) are in BM.

Whether these were struck during the brief time that the mint was open under the British, is not clear.

# RRR

## Calcutta Mint **Introduction of Steam**

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold, Pattern Mohur** **- Shah Alam II - 1830** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Wt (g)** 13.27- 13.30 **Diam (mm)** 29.2-29.3  **Metal** Gold **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Edge** **Comments** **Rarity**

**9.1** SG RRR **9.2** GL Later striking. RR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold, Mohur -**

**Shah Alam II - 1831 to 1835** Tiny crescent at top left of reverse. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) ** ** **Wt** **(g)** 12.35- 12.37  **Diam** **(mm)** 26.2- 27.4  **Metal** Gold  **Edge** Grained Left --- **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Obv Status Date** **Issued** **Comments** **Rarity**

**9.3** 84 A Currency 1830 Dot privy mark in top line. S **-** - - A Silver Pattern? Forgery?? Ref: Wiggins 1999: 19. Forgery?

# N/A

**9.4** - - B Currency 1830 Ref:  Baldwin/Taisei (2000), Sale 30, Lot 559. Ref: Thompson, also Hemanth Chopra. No dot privy mark in top line.

# R

**Obverse Varieties** **Dot Privy** **Mark**

On some coins, there is a tiny dot above the two dots in the upper left area of the design

** ** **A** **B** **Dot Privy Mark** Dot No Dot *Dot present * *No dot present *

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Rupee and** **Half Rupee - 1831 to 1833 - Mint-Name:** ***Murshidabad*** ** ** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya *

*fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh * (= Defender
of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 12.43 6.21 **Wt (g)** 12.36-12.47 5.78-6.21 **Diam (mm)** 26.3-26.5 23.0-23.5 **Edge** Varies. See table below **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Denomination Obv Rev Status Edge Comments Rarity**

**9.5** 177 Rupee A I Currency P C **9.6** 178 " A II Proof P RRR **9.7** - " A II Pewter Die-trial Weight: 9.60 g. NR **9.8** 179 " B II Proof SG No star on obv. No crescent on rev.

# RRR

**9.9** 180 Half Rupee - - - Currency P  C **9.10** 181 " - - -  Proof P RRR **9.11** 182 " - - -  Proof SG RRR **Obverse Varieties for Rupee** **Star** A star may or may not appear in the design on the obverse below *bād* of *bādshāh*. ** ** **A** **B** **Star** Present Absent

*Star present * *Star absent * **Reverse Varieties for Rupee** **Crescent** There may or may not be a tiny crescent.

** ** **I** **II** **Crescent** Present Absent

*Crescent present * *Crescent absent * **Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Quarter Rupee**

**- 1831 to 1833 - Mint-Name:** ***Murshidabad*** ** **

* * * * *1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Wt (g)** 3.10-3.11  **Diam (mm)** 16.3-17.0  **Metal** Silver

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. Status Edge** **Comments** **Rarity** **9.12** Currency P C **9.13** Proof P RRR **9.14** Proof SG RR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Rupee and** **Half Rupee - 1831 to 1833 - Mint-Name:** ***Farrukhabad*** ** ** Tiny crescent mark at top left of the reverse. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * *julūs maimanat mānūs* --- *bādshāh * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad,

Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Rupee** **Half Rupee** **Official Wt (g)** 11.68 5.84 **Wt (g)** 11.65-11.66 5.60-5.81 **Diam (mm)** 26.5-26.5 22.9 **Metal** Silver **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination Status Edge Comments Rarity**

**9.15** 326 Rupee Currency P C **9.16** 327 " Proof P Diam = 27.2-27.3.

# RR

**9.17** 328 " Proof SG Diam=27.6. RR **9.18** 329 Half Rupee Currency P C **9.19** 330 " Proof P Diam = 23.1-23.2.

# RR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Quarter Rupee**

**- 1831 to 1833 - Mint-Name:** ***Farrukhabad*** ** ** Tiny crescent mark in the middle left of the obverse.

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb farrukhābād sanah 45  * (= Struck at Farrukhābād in year 45) **Official** **Wt (g)** 2.92 **Wt** **(g)** 2.89- 2.93 **Diam** **(mm)** 16.4  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Status** **Comments** **Rarity**

**9.20** Currency C **9.21** Proof $$ Diam = 17.0. $$ RR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver, Rupee** ***et infra*** **-**

**1833 to 1835 - Mint-Name:** ***Farrukhabad*** ** ** No tiny crescent mark at top left of the reverse. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh  * *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 * *julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * **Wt** **(g)** Varies. See below **Diam** **(mm)** 26.5- 27.7  **Metal** Silver  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Status** **Wt** **(g)** **Comments** **Rarity**

**9.22** 333 Currency 11.65 Copper forgeries exist. See <https://www.psIndianCoins.com.>

# C **-** - - Copper Pattern?

14.01 Possibly a contemporary forgery or a pattern for the proposed pice coinage? Stevens 2006: 18-23. See below.

# N/A

**9.24** 334 Proof RR **9.25** 334 Proof Milled edge. Ref: R. Weir. RRR

In 1805, the mint-master at Calcutta was informed that: *"...I am further directed to acquaint you that the Governor * *General in Council has determined on the introduction of a new * *copper coinage in the Conquered and Ceded Provinces, to be * *also struck in the mint at Farrukhābād, consisting of pure * *copper, and corresponding in form, size and impression with * *those prescribed for the new silver coinage intended to be * *immediately established in the said provinces. The pie is to be of * *the same size as the rupee and the half pie of the same size as * *the half rupee, increasing in thickness in proportion to the * *difference in weight between silver and copper coin. It is not * *intended that smaller copper coin shall be struck than a half pie. * *In preparing specimens of the new copper coin you will regulate * *the weight of each pie at 290 grains troy weight. It is necessary * *to add that the edges of the new copper coin are not to be milled, * *or to have any mark or impression thereon..." * Copper pattern? Wt = 14.01 g, diam = 27.2 mm (however, 290 grains would equal 18.8 g)

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper, Pice - 1831**

*sanah julūs 37 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= in the 37 th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam)

The value in three languages: Bengali: *ek pai sikka. * Persian: y *ek pai sikka. * Hindi: *ek pai * *sikka. * (Translation of all --- languages = one pai sikka). Within a plain, raised rim. **Wt** **(g)** 5.87- 6.64 **Diam** **(mm)** 22.8- 23.0  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Date** **Issued** **Status** **Comments** **Rarity**

**9.26** 209 1831 Currency C **9.27** 210 Proof RRR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper, Half Anna -** **1831 to 1835** The value in English: *HALF ANNA * and Bengali: (Bengali = a *dha āna* = Half Anna). Within a raised, toothed rim.

The value in two languages: Persian: *nīm ana * Nagari: *ādhā ānā * (= Half anna). Within a raised, toothed rim. **Wt** **(g)** 12.85- 13.01 **Diam** **(mm)** 27.5- 28.2 **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination Status Axis Comments Rarity**

**9.28** 213 Half Anna Currency ↑↑ Ref: Weir C **9.29** 213 " Currency ↑↓ Ref: Weir C **9.30** 214 " Proof RR Varieties may exist with 1 or 2 dots on reverse (Weir). Crescent privy mark on rev. of Half Anna Crescent privy mark on
rev. of Pie **Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper Pie -** **1831 to 1835** The value in English

# ONE PIE and Bengali: (Bengali = *ek pai * = one pie). Within a raised, toothed rim. The value in two languages: Persian: e *k pai.* Nagari: e *k pai. * (Translation = one pie). **Wt** **(g)** 2.06- 2.24 **Diam** **(mm)** 16.4- 16.6  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination Axis Status Comments Rarity** **9.31** 215 Pie ↑↓ Currency As with the half anna, pies with axis ↑↑ may exist.

# C **9.32** 216 " Proof RR

## Soho Mint

**Soho Mint - Copper, Hexagonal Patterns** Ref: Vice 1998: 2-5

Balemark with date *1792 * below. Surrounded by three hexagonal lines, the centre line twisted.

Scales with Persian inscription between the pans (= *'adil * = just or fair).

All surrounded by three hexagonal lines, the centre
one twisted. **Large Size** **Small Size** **Official Wt (g)** 1.45 0.36 **Wt (g)** 1.40-1.42? **Diam (mm)** 15.1-17.7 ~9.5 **Metal** Copper **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Denomination** **Comments** **Rarity**

**10.1** Large Size RR **10.2** " Obverse only. Reverse blank.

# RRR **10.3** " Reverse only. Obverse blank.

# RRR **10.4** Small Size RRR **Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Pice - 1795** *sanah julūs 37 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= in the 37 th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam) The value in three
languages: Bengali: *ek pai sikka.* Persian: *yek pai sikka. * Hindi: *ek pai sikka. * (= one pai sikka) --- **Wt** **(g)** Varies. See below **Diam** **(mm)** 30.2  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Varies. See below **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Metal Edge Wt (g)** **Comments** **Rarity** **10.5** 380 Copper P 14.19- 14.32 Example in BM: 14.22 g, 30.2 mm

# RR

**10.6** 381 Copper SG RRR **10.7** 382 Copper Gilt

# P RRR **10.8** Pewter P 13.20 Taken from Pridmore. Diam $$ = 34 mm. $$

# RRR **Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Pie - 1809,** **No Value on Obverse** The arms of the Company with the date *1809 * below. * * The motto on the ribbon
reads: *AUSP:REGIS & * *SENAT:ANGLIAE * Surrounded by a raised, toothed rim. The Persian inscription: y *ek pai sikka * * * Surrounded by the value in Bengali and Hindi * (ek pai * *sikka)*: Bengali:

Hindi: (Translation of all languages = one pai sikka). Within a toothed, raised rim. **Wt** **(g)** 7.85- 7.92 **Diam** **(mm)** 27.4- 27.5 **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **10.9** BM specimen die axis: ↑→ RR **Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Pie - 1809, Blank Reverse**

The arms of the Company with the date *1809 * below. The motto on the ribbon
reads: *AUSP:REGIS & * *SENAT:ANGLIAE * Surrounded by a raised, toothed rim. Blank

**Wt (g)** 7.59  **Diam (mm)** 27.4  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **10.10** RR **Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Pie - 1809,** **Value on Obverse** The arms of the Company with the date *1809* below and the value *ONE PIE * above. * * The motto on the ribbon
reads: *AUSP:REGIS & * *SENAT:ANGLIAE * Surrounded by a raised, toothed rim. The Persian inscription: *yek pai sikka * * * Surrounded by the value in Bengali and Hindi * (ek pai * *sikka)*: Bengali: Hindi: (Translation of all languages = one pai sikka). Within a toothed, raised rim. **Wt** **(g)** Varies. See below **Diam** **(mm)** 27.4- 27.5 **Metal** Varies. See below **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No.** **Pr.** **No.** **Metal Wt (g)** **Comments** **Rarity**

**10.11** Gold Value presumably indicated on obv, but not seen.

# RRR

**10.12** Silver 8.57 Specimen in BM (1935.0401.12264). 8.57 g, 27.5 mm. Die axis: ↑→

# RRR **10.13** Copper Gilt 7.02- 7.53 BM specimen die axis: ↑→

# RR **10.14** Copper or Bronze

Recorded with die axis ↑↑, ↑→ & ↑↓. Wts of 6.32-10.88 -

# RR

**10.15** Pewter Assume that value is shown on obv, but not seen.

# RRR **Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Pie - 1809** The arms of the Company
with the date *1809* below and the value *ONE * *PIE * above. Surrounded by a
raised, toothed rim. Die the size of a half pie on flan the size of a pie. Blank

**Wt (g)** 1.91  **Diam (mm)** 27.6  **Metal** Pewter  **Edge** Plain --- **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity**

**10.16** - - Ref: SNC April 1980. Also Pr. Sale, Lot  694.

# RRR **Soho Mint - Copper, Mule Pie - 1809** The arms of the Company
with the date *1809* below and the value *ONE * *PIE * above. The motto on the
ribbon reads: *AUSP:REGIS & * *SENAT:ANGLIAE * Surrounded by a raised, toothed rim. The three legs of the Isle of Man triskeles, surrounded by the legend *QVOCVNQUE IECERIS * *STABIT * on a broad, raised rim.

**Wt (g)** 10.96  **Diam (mm)** 27.5  **Metal** Copper  **Edge** Plain

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No.** **Comments** **Rarity** **10.17** RRR **Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Half Pie - 1809** The arms of the Company with the date *1809* below and the value above: *HALF PIE. * Surrounded by a raised, toothed rim. The Persian inscription: *nim pai sikka * * * surrounded by the value in Bengali and Hindi: Bengali *(ad pai sikka): * Hindi *(adha pai sikka): * (Translation of all languages = half pai sikka). Within a toothed, raised rim. **Wt** **(g)** Varies. See below **Diam** **(mm)** 21.6  **Metal** Varies. See below **Edge** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat** **No.** **Pr.** **No.**

**Metal** **Wt (g)** **Comments** **Rarity**

**10.18** 392 Gold? RRR **10.19** 393 Silver 4.72 BM specimen die axis: ↑→

# RRR **10.20** 394 Copper Gilt 4.27 BM specimen die axis: ↑→

# RR **10.21** 395 Copper or Bronze 4.00-4.31 BM specimen die axis: ↑→

# RR **10.22** - - White metal 4.07 Ref: Pr. Sale, Lot 696.

# RRR

**Soho Mint - Copper, Pattern Half Pie - 1809**

A lion standing to left and holding a crown. The date *1809 * below and the value * *

*HALF PIE * above. Surrounded by a raised, toothed rim. (The standing lion is the crest of the EIC). * * Blank **Wt**

**(g)** 4.78 **Diam** **(mm)** 21.5  **Metal** Varies. See below **Edge** CGL

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. Metal** **Comments** **Rarity** **10.23** Copper RRR **10.24** - - Pewter Ref: SNC June 1984, p.161, Lot 3847

# RRR

**Abbreviations** BM British Museum DNW Dix Noonan Webb KM *Standard Catalog of World Coins* LMC Brown, *Catalogue of Coins in the Provincial Museum * *Lucknow * Pr Pridmore, *The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations * *Part 4 India Vol. I* *** *** SNC *Spinks Numismatic Circular* ** ** **Bibliography** Brown, C.J., 1920, *Catalogue of Coins in the Provincial Museum *

*Lucknow*, Oxford University Press, Oxford. KM Standard Catalog of World Coins, various catalogues, Krause

Publications, Iola. Kulkarni, P., 1988-1989, 'Saugor Mint and the E.I.C. Coins',

*Numismatic Digest*, Vol. 12-13, pp. 119-122. Mitchiner, M., 1979, *Non-Islamic States & Western Colonies*, B.A.

Seaby, London. Pridmore, F., 1975, *The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations *

*Part 4 India Volume I East India Company Presidency Series*, Spink & Son, London. Pridmore, F., 1978, *Spinks Numismatic Circular*, LXXXVI, p. 68. Pridmore Sale, 18-19 October 1982, Glendining & Co., London. Rhodes, N.G., 1999, 'The First E.I.C. Copper Coins for Bengal', *ONS *

*NL* 159, pp. 15-16. *Seaby's Coins & Medal Bulletin*, London. Senior, R.C., 1993, 'A New Benares Mohur', *ONS NL * 137, p. 16. *Spinks Numismatic Circular*, London. Stevens, P., 2006, 'Coins of the Ceded and Conquered Provinces', *ONS *

*NL * 188, pp. 18-22. Stevens, P., 2012, *The Coinage of the Hon. East India Company: Part I *

*The Coins of the Bengal Presidency*, Baldwin's & Sons, London. Stevens, P., 2017, *The Coins of the English East India Company. *

*Presidency Series - A Catalogue and Pricelist*, Spink & Son, London. Stevens, P., <https://www.psIndianCoins.com.> Tandon, P., 2008, 'Bengal Presidency: Some Unlisted Coins', *ONS NL *

194, pp. 37-38. Valentine, W.H., 1914, *The Copper Coins of India, Part I: Bengal and *

*the United Provinces*, Spink & Son, London. Vice, D., 1998, 'A Pattern Cowrie Coinage for Bengal Presidency',

*Format* Vol. 58, pp. 2-5. Weir, R., <https://www.randyweirnumismatics.com.> Wiggins, K., 1999, 'Two Unusual Coins', *ONS NL* 161, pp. 19-20. Zeno.ru Oriental Coins Database, <https://www.zeno.ru.>
**BOOK REVIEW** ** ** ***Erach Rediscovered: Coins, Inscriptions, Seals and Sealings*** ** ** **by Om Prakash Lal Srivastava** ** ** **Rajgor's Heritage Hub, Mumbai, 2020** **Hardcover, 151 pages, including 15 colour plates** ** **

** ** Erach (Erich) was an important city in northern India during the Early Historical Period, lying as it did on an important trade route due to its location on the river Betwa, 70 km from Jhansi. It was connected by river to the ancient sites of Eran, Vidisha and Kausambi.

The ancient urban settlement of *Erakachha * stands out for its long and varied series of coins. It is perhaps the only authority that issued coins using all three minting processes: punchmarked, cast and die-struck. We find silver, copper and lead coins; these were issued by the city state, then by kings and even one minister, Amatya Ashadhamitra. This last type is significant in ancient Indian numismatics, as we know no other instance of a minister ( *Amatya* ) striking coins in his own name (Bhandare 2003: 16).

This book brings together all the latest research on the coins and sealings of Erich, providing a detailed catalogue of its archaeology and historical material from the 6 th century BCE to 5 th century CE.

Om Prakash Lal Srivastava has been at the forefront of understanding Erich coinage - as an archaeologist in Jhansi, he published a few coins, a seal and two brick inscriptions from this ancient site in 1991. In the three decades since, we have had two key publications on Erich: Mohanlal Gupta's bilingual monograph in 2000 and Shailendra Bhandare's article in *JONS * in 2003.

This book is therefore a welcome addition, and an opportunity for Srivastava to come full circle, completing the overview of Erich's numismatic material that he began in 1991.

The book is richly detailed: it provides chapters on punchmarked coins - both silver and the later copper - inscribed coins of the *Erakachha* city state (22 types have been listed), and coins of local kings of the Mitra and Sena dynasties. It also includes the lead coins of Ajina, Kasera and Mugamukha, which are unlike any seen in other city states.

*Erach Rediscovered* includes a chapter on the several inscriptions we see on bricks, and another on seals and sealings, which together play an important role in understanding Erich's transition from city state to kingdom.

Other chapters deal with terracottas, sculptures, architecture, pottery and tools. These will be important for archaeologists; for numismatists, there is much to cheer about with the large database included and all the coins photographed. Unfortunately, the coin photos accompanying the text are in black and white, which is disappointing, given that copper and lead coins do not photograph well in monotone. This situation is redeemed by the 15 plates in colour, which illustrate the main pieces discussed in the book.

The coin database would have benefited from rarity indicators, so that collectors could understand which types are common, scarce or rare. Also, the coin numbering system used here is not continuous. If it had been, we would be able to refer to any coin by a single number; instead, we now have to refer to a page number and the coin's relative position on that page, which is an inefficient system.

Nevertheless, this book is a must-have for collectors of ancient Indian coins, since Erich occupies such a significant position in ancient Indian numismatics. Srivastava has once again set the benchmark for our knowledge of Erich, including as this book does all the latest research on this series.

Karan Singh **Bibliography** Bhandare, S., 2003, 'Kings, Commanders and a Minister at Erich',

*Journal of the Oriental Numismatic Society * 175, pp. 11-17.

Gupta, M.L., 2000, *Erich An Ancient City on River Betwa*, Varanasi.

Srivastava, O.P.L., 1991, *Archaeology of Erich*, Varanasi. ** **
**ONS NEWS** ** ** **Obituary** **U Than Htun (1949-2022)** ** ** ** ** On the 25 th of January, one of the greatest connoisseurs of Burmese art, U Than Htun (Dedaye), passed away in Yangon after a long illness.

He left behind his wife Mimi and two sons, but also, as a sort of memorial, two important books: one on coins and the other on lacquerware.

Htun was born in 1949 in Dedaye, a small town in the delta region west of Yangon. As a young man, Htun´s parents trained him during school breaks as an apprentice in their gold-and silversmith shop. He saw how many beautiful and ancient coins were melted down and decided to save some. That´s how his collection and interest in numismatics started in the early 1960s. Htun finished high school in 1966 and joined the local university in Yangon. In 1968, during the SEAP (Southeast Asian Peninsular Games), he took part in the student protest against the military government and was jailed for 20 months in Insein prison.

Htun obtained in 1972 a BSc in Geology, and started a small broker shop on Sule Pagoda road in Yangon, concentrating on jewellery, bullion and, of course, coins. In 1988, during the political crisis, Htun joined Aung San Suu Kyi\`s National League for Democracy (NLD). He was elected as the MP of his hometown Dedaye in the 1990 elections, but instead of going to parliament, he was often detained.

After that, Htun took a break from politics and opened a small art gallery, Heritage Gallery, in Bogyoke (former Scott) Market in Yangon. From the 1970s onwards, he travelled far and wide in Myanmar in search of art, collecting material also for the two books he planned to publish.

The first book, *Auspicious Symbols and Ancient Coins of * *Myanmar,* was published in 2008. The novelty about this book was, amongst other things, that Htun explained the various symbols on the old coins and attributed them in detail to specific locations. He had always written down during his trips where certain coins came from (or enquired from the locals about the findspot or excavation place). Htun's book is still used as a reference for ancient Burmese coins.

The second book is nowadays a rarity (and a beauty as well). It was published in 2012 and is called *Lacquerware Journeys - The * *Untold Story of Burmese Lacquer*. In this book, Htun applied the
same method as in the coin book: he attributed lacquerware according to its origin. When he could not travel to a certain area - a no-go area - he contacted the specialist there from Yangon.

With Htun's passing, we have lost not only a great specialist and connoisseur, but also a warm-hearted, socially-very engaged person. He was a devout Buddhist in the truest sense. After cyclone Nargis, he supported social projects in his home town. Every time I accompanied him on some of his journeys, he visited the main pagodas, met the abbots, and made donations. And yes, he was a wonderful humorous personality. We cherish his memory and miss him. But we have his two beautiful books. And his two sons are continuing the Art Gallery in Yangon. Hans Mondorf
***Officers of the Oriental Numismatic Society***

**Secretary General**:  Pankaj Tandon, ptandon@bu.edu

**Deputy Secretary General**:  Joe Cribb, joecribb@btinternet.com ** **

**Editor**:  Karan Singh, editor.jons@gmail.com **  **

**Treasurer**:  Ashok Jain, ashokjainlondon@gmail.com

**E-Communications Secretary**:  Ed Snible, esnible@acm.org **Regional Secretaries:**

***General*** *:  * J. Mark Ritchie, gensect@orientalnumismaticsociety.org

***Europe*** *:  * Patrick Pasmans, parthianstudies@hotmail.com

***U.K. & Eire*** *:*  Helen Wang, hwang@britishmuseum.org

***North America*** *:*  Michael J. Connor, ons.america@gmail.com

***South Asia*** *:  * Mohit Kapoor, reg.sec@ons-sa.org

***Pakistan*** *:  * Haroon Tareen, haroon.t@gmail.com

***China*** *:*  Dai Jianbing, ** ** hebeinu@126.com

The Journal of the Oriental Numismatic Society is an international peer-reviewed journal that is published quarterly.

**Editorial Committee:** Joe Cribb, Pankaj Tandon, and Shailendra Bhandare ** ** ** **

Annual Subscription:  UK  £25; rest of Europe  €30; American continent  $35
for other areas please consult the appropriate Regional Secretary

**Website**:  <https://www.orientalnumismaticsociety.org>

*Printed by Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, U.K. *