
ethnic plaques and pendants representing the d of rural communities. Preceding this part of the a discussion of rural beliefs with particula iconography observed on the rural plaques favo and the rural pendants preferred in such other re

The main body of the work includes a catal medals illustrating the more mainstream conce urban India. Approximately half the medals w around 1800 and 1947. The rest were made independent in 1947 and introduced the new Republic of India in 1950. The modern medals interesting range of iconographic designs relate the Indus, Jains, Sikhs, Moslems, Parsees and part of the book, these mainstream beliefs particular reference to the iconography obs medals. The medals, themselves, were issued f giving at Diwali, and when celebrating such births, religious initiations, marriages, an pilgrimages. Others commemorate the jubilees commercial enterprises.

The first part of the book deals with such series as the ramatankas and related medals. So Deccan ramatankas are included, but most catalogued in this section were made in the terr Presidency during the nineteenth to early twent groups of more coin-like medals are the seri based on the East India Company's Murshida were made at many towns in the Bengal Presid bearing designs derived from Venetian ducats, the territory of the Bombay Presidency. The h medals made for use in the British-administer only surveyed. More attention is devoted to th for use in various Indian states. After the Briti suppressed the East India Company in 1858, i hundis. Bombay's business community reacted and silver tolas as a tax-exempt vehicle transactions. A good range of Bombay's gold catalogued. The fewer gold tolas of Calcutta a as are Hundis. The Second World War wa numismatic and medallic context for the asso base metals and, therefore, of low-denominat small states in the north-west reacted by print coupons to service low-value transactions, an pieces is catalogued. For the mill-owners and commercial enterprises, a different solution w tokens.

The period of the Second World War was the progress made by the Independence M Contemporary medals depict such prominent f Karamchand Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Sarda and, in greater variety, the enigmatic figure o Bose.

Most of the material published in this b fields, such as ramatankas and historical meda Other series, such as Indian state medals, canteen tokens have been discussed in disparat leaves a large body of material which is publish and integrated with what is already known t overall picture." \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***Money: Traditional Korean Society*** by Yu-ha Lee, first published 2006, Seoul, Korea, pp.1 674-604300. ***Coins, Trade, and the State: Economic Growth*** ***Japan (Harvard East Asian Monographs)*** ** ** by 2011. Price: around US$ 40.

"Framed by the decline of the Heian aristocrac and the rise of the Tokugawa shogunate in the e medieval era was a chaotic period of diffuse p frequent military strife. This instability deities and concepts e catalogue, there is ar reference to the oured in the Deccan egions as Rajasthan. logue of some 2000 pts and practices of were made between
after India became constitution for the present a wide and ed to beliefs held by d Christians. In one
are discussed with served on modern for such purposes as h family events as nd compleltion of of many banks and well-known medal ome rare mediaeval
of the ramatankas ritory of the Bengal tieth centuries. Two ies bearing designs abad rupees, which dency and the putlis
which circulated in historical and other red presidencies are
hose commissioned ish government had it imposed a tax on
by introducing gold for local business d and silver tolas is are also represented, as noteworthy in a
ociated shortage of tion coinage. Many ting cardboard cash nd a range of these d some other large was to issue canteen also noteworthy for Movement in India. figures as Mohanda a Vallabhbhai Patel of Subhas Chandra book is new. Some als are well-known.
cash coupons and e publications. This hed for the first time to form a coherent an W ŏ n, Kyong-hee 152 ISBN 89-7300- ***h in Early Medieval*** Ethan Isaac Segal, cy in the late 1100s early 1600s, Japan's political power and prevented central
authorities from regulating trade, issuing currency, enforcing contracts, or guaranteeing property rights. But the lack of a strong central government did not inhibit economic growth. Rather, it created opportunities for a wider spectrum of society to participate in trade, markets, and monetisation. Peripheral elites, including merchants, warriors, rural estate managers, and religious leaders, devised new ways to circumvent older forms of exchange by importing Chinese currency, trading in local markets, and building an effective remittance. Over time, the cent futility of trying to stifle these de century it asserted greater co throughout the realm.

Drawing upon diaries, tax government decrees, the author c copper currency and the expansi market-centered economy and la transformation into an early mode \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***A Sylloge of the Sasanian Coins*** ***(Muzeh Melli Iran), Tehran, vol*** ***III,*** By Vesta Sarkhosh Curtis, Pendleton with Richard Hodge Numismatic Society Special Pub the British Institute of Persian Stu (250 plates with text opposite). IS 64 7. Price: £75 plus postage and p

"This volume completes the proje the Sasanian coins, mostly silve Department of Coins and Seals of The first volume (RNS SP 47, L coins from Ardashir I to Hormizd the 2948 coins from Khusrau II to continuous from the vol. I to vo strong in silver coinage of Khusra is the breadth of mints and regnal and detailed descriptions of each material"

Volume I is still available for £45 from the Book Department, Spink outlets. \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***Numismatic Digest*** Vol. 34-35, Publications Pvt. Ltd, Mumbai, included), available from the publ Fax 91-22-22854741; E-mail: iirn Contents: "An interesting Eran-Ujjain silve

Maj. M.K. Gupta "Recent discoveries in early in Prashant Kulkarni "A Roman coin hoard from Ma

H.K. Khandoba Rao "Two clay sealings of Vaisrava f

Lal Srivastava "Coins of Vaisaravana, an unkno
coins" by Amiteshwar Jha "Tentative attributions of some Gangas" by Pankaj Tandon
e system of long-distance money tral government recognised the evelopments, and by the sixteenth ontrol over monetary matters
ledgers, temple records, and chronicles how the circulation of ion of trade led to the start of a aid the groundwork for Japan's ern society." \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***in the national Museum of Iran*** ***lume 2, Khusrau II - Yazdgard***

- Elahé Askari, Elizabeth J.  es and Ali-Akbar Safi. Royal blication 49, in  association with udies, London, 2012. Pp. ix + 500

# SSN 0080 4487; ISBN 0 901 405 packing. ect to catalogue in sylloge form all er but with some bronze, in the
f the National Museum in Tehran. London, 2010) covered the 1476
d IV. This second volume covers o Yazdgard III; the numeration is ol. II. The Museum is especially au II, and the collection's strength
years represented. Superb images coin highlight the richness of the 5. Both volumes can be purchased k & Son Ltd. and the usual other \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* has been published by IIRNS

India. Price: US $30 (postage lisher (Tel. No.: 91-22-43534353; ns-publications@ucil.co.in). er coin" by Devendra Handa & nscribed coins of Vidarbha" by attadakere" by M. Girijapathy & from Kausambi" by Om Prakash own king, and some more ancient e gold fanams of the Eastern --- "A small hoard of Chinese cash found in G

Mitchiner "New metallic assays of Bengal Sultan silve

Deyell "Decorative art on Mughal and sultanate coins" "Copper circulation in northern India in 1830

Jan Lucassen "Modern Indian medals of the Bohras" by Mich \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In India, A.V. Narasimha Murthy and D. Raja R out a 397-page book entitled 'Gold Coins in th Lord Sri Venkateswara'. The Srivari Hundi at different types of offerings, varying from curr grains to clothes and jewellery to share doc lifetime. Gold, silver and copper coins offered t nineteen centuries are carefully preserved by th Devasthanams (TTD) management and range f of the 1st century AD to that of the Nizam era The authors have described the gold coins of the Hoysala dynasty, the Vijayanagara k Wodeyars, Hyder Ali and Tippu Sultan pe dynasty, the British era and the Nizam period, The book contains pictures of 1,213 gold co historical description of each dynasty repre relevant information. The book is priced at IRs \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***The Early Coins of Myanmar*** ***(Burma), Messengers of the Past*** by Mahlo Deitrich, Bangkok 2012, 192 pp., illus. 15 pp. in col., 1 map, US $50. ISBN 978974-480-191-3. Available from whitelotusbooks.com and probably other outlets.

"In the ancient and medieval periods, the people of Myanmar lived in a world full of coins. Coins form a major part of their archaeological heritage and represent some impressive examples of early Asian design.

The author has devoted almost fifty year provenance of these coins. He has studied combinations of symbols and offers the results the public, organised on a geographical and chr doing so, he is not only concerned with res themselves, but also with studying them as otherwise lost history and culture. This research to evidence of strong Indian influences in anc the beginning of the modern era; to new development and extent of the Kingdom of Sri and fall of Halingyi; the origins of Pagan; to Khmer incursion as far as Thaton; as well as to medieval period, of previously unknown sma Burma and on the Gulf of Martaban.

The early coins of Myanmar/Burma open a one of the forgotten civilisations of Southeast A \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Issue 4 of *Numismatique Asiatique,* the journa Numismatique Asiatique, France, has now contains three article on Cambodian coinage: "La monnaie cambodgienne à l'animal fantastiq Alain Escabasse; "Quelques monnaies cambodgiennes de Jules S François Joyaux; From the archives: "Monnaies khmères, d'après (1921)" Gujarat" by Michael er tankas" by John by Danish Moin " by Jan Lingen & hael Mitchiner Reddy have brought
he Srivari Hundi of t Tirumala has seen rency to sale deeds,
cuments during its to the Lord for fully he Tirumala Tirupati from the Roman era
of the 20 th century. the Roman period, kings, the Mysore eriods, the Mughal found in the hundi. oins (both sides), a esented, and other 2,000. rs to recording the
their symbols and of his researches to ronological basis. In earch on the coins s documents of an h has led the author cient Burma around insights into the i Ksetra; to the rise
the possibility of a the existence, in the all states in Upper a new window onto Asia. " al of the Société de been published. It que dit *makara* " by ilvestre" by s George Groslier An article on French Indian coinag Deniel Cariou; And information on various recen For more information please conta numis.asia@orange.fr \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

# H ***V*** ***II*** ***M*** B m p E E P
c a in a occurred within the boundarie throughout the world, were in economic problems of the Ottom which greatly affected coin minti follows:

The silver crisis that emerged mines in the 17 th century in the O causing the collapse of the O standards of the coins produced started to degrade and the state wa and measures of the coins due authority. The state, which could difficult circumstances, ended th While the number of mints produ the beginning of the century, as of of active mints came down to few

The present volume of this completed in nine volumes, cover Osman II, Murad IV, Ibrahim and

- • Year-by-year chronolog years of these sultanates - • The most significant  period; - • Detailed information on This volume includes the details o 18 coins of Sultan Ahmed II, 104 coins of Sultan Ahmed III and 33 831 gold and silver coins. Additio history of nearly 50 provinces w reigns and examines the character provinces. An inventory of the coins bel at the end of the book.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* **Royal Numismatic Society** Material of interest to ONS memb journals of the Royal Numismat included articles on: *The Fineness of Persian Silver Co*

Niculexcu Migdonia Georgescu *An Arab-Sogdian Coin of AH 1*

Aleksandr Naymark and Luke T *Sasanian Numismatic Research in* *Iran* by Hodge Mehdi Malek pp. 4

And in Volume 172 (2012) article *Roman Coins from the Macke* *Museum* by Sushma Jansari, p.9 ge: "Le monnayage de Mahé" by t publications and events. act the editor, François Joyaux at \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***History*** ***of*** ***Ottoman*** ***Coins:*** ***Volume 6 - Suleyman II, Ahmed*** ***II,  Mustafa II, Ahmed III,*** ***Mahmud I*** By Dr Atom Damalı, hard cover, 440 pages, in colour, 210 x 297 mm, in Turkish and English, published by Nilüfer Damalı Education, Culture and Environment Foundation, 2012. Price: US $160 "From the end of the sixteenth century onwards, various administrative, military, ndustrial, commercial, financial and social developments, which
es of the Ottoman state and nstrumental in exacerbating the man Empire. These developments, ng, can be summarised briefly as
d due to the closure of the silver Ottoman Empire was also a factor Ottoman monetary system. The d at the mints beyond Istanbul as not able to inspect the fineness
to the weakness of the central d not control the mints in these he operations of many of them. ucing coins had been above 50 at f the mid-17 th century the number er than 10.
work, which is expected to be rs the reigns of sultans Mustafa I, d Mehmed IV, and contains: gical information regarding the 67 s; historical developments of this n coins. of 28 coins of Sultan Suleyman II,

4 coins of Sultan Mustafa II, 346 35 coins of Sultan Mahmud I; i.e. onally, the book provides the local
which issued coins during these ristics of the coins minted in these longing to the sultans is provided \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
bers has been published in recent tic Society. Volume 171 (2011) *oins* by Emanuel Petac, Gheorghe, pp.1-6 *160: an Ikshid in Ishtihan?* by Treadwell, pp.359-366 *n the Context of the Muzeh Melli* 469-486 es include: *enzie Collection at the British* 93-104
*A Unique Coin of Ab* ū *al-Hayj* ā *, Ja'farid Emi*

Paghava and Severiane Turkia, 205-212 *Counterfeit Parthian Drachms* by David Sellwo *A hoard of Kushano-Sasanian copper coins*

Andrea Gariboldi and Nikolaus Schindel, pp.3 *Returning to the Kuiuk-kala hoard of*

*Khwarezmian drachms* by Michael Fedo Kuznetsov pp.335-342

The Royal Numismatic Society has also partici and Medals Network program of audio pod lecture of Alex Fang *The study of Chinese* *changes* *and* *challenges* is available **<http://www.moneyandmedals.org.uk**> and is replaced soon by the January lecture by *Pseudo-Sasanian coinage. How do you to recog* *struck?* \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***Coins of Jahang*** ***Numismatist,*** by 2013, published Manohar, India, ISBN 13: 978817 8173049947.  Price believed to around £50.

"This book is a author's Coinage *Connoisseur's Ch* 2005, and is the research over a pe years. Jahangir's coins have always been the most sou coins on account of their exquisite beauty and the demand has always outstripped supply they be the forger's favourite. Keeping this in mind, added on forgeries. It should be of partic collectors. The catalogue section of the book, pages (57 for gold coins with 125 types, 108 types; and 40 pages for copper coins with 60 illustrated with over 600 coins. The illustration side ** **by** ** side with the descriptions for easier r information has been obtained from the coll museums and numismatic societies, as well as all over the world. Many of these coins are bein first time; this applies especially to Jahangir's c represent as many as 47 mints. The author's inv will be of interest to numismatic scholars and a answers to some of their most baffling quest why did Jahangir issue a large proportion of name of his father, yet Akbar was conspicuous Kalima-type coins?; or, Why did he issue so exhortation Allah-Uh-Akbar with his own name

***Copper*** * * ***Coins of Iran*** by * * Bahram Ala al-Dini is a new book, in English and Farsi, on the copper coins issued under the Safavids and other dynasties up to the Qajars. These coins often bear images of various animals and birds, including horses, elephants, antilopes, peacocks, lions, sunfaces, and other symbols, and nowadays are keenly collected. Some 300 types are catalo together with their size and weight and other book's first release is being marketed by Y Company in Iran. It comprises 170 pages and *ir of Tifl* ī *s* by Irakli ood, pp.215-218 *s from Hulbuk* by 333-334 *early mediaeval* orov and Andrew ipated in the Money dcasts. The public *e coin-like charms:* on the website s scheduled to be Susan Tyler-Smith *gnise it? Why was it* ***ir: Creations of a***

Andrew Liddle, and distributed by hardback, pp 272. 3049941 ISBN 10: o be IRs 3500 or
follow-up to the of Akbar, *The* *hoice*, published in result of extensive eriod of nearly eight ught-after of Mughal d craftsmanship. As
y have continued to, a chapter has been cular help to new, which covers 205
for silver with 226 types), is profusely ns have been placed reference. The coin lections of famous s private collections
ng published for the copper coins, which vestigative approach academics in finding tions. For example,
his coins with the sly missing from his ome coins with the e missing?, etc."
ogued in the book, r relevant data. The Yasavoli Publishing d 3,000 copies have
been produced. At the time of wri available. ** ** **Book Reviews** In JONS 213 we unfortunately om author of the review of Wang Ch *Chinese Gold & silver Cons: 179* by Wolfgang Bertsch and our omission. ** **

## Arti

# THE 'YEAR 20 M By W A Oddy an **The Year 20 Mint and the P** **Coinage in Earl**

In 1992, a group of 24 irregul previously unknown type was They appear to bear a date on the they were described as prod Commenting on the design and p and the number of specimens kn cursory examination of the dies, 2
conclusion that the coins might b that is they may have been produ meet a local need' in the earl conquest of Syria. 3

In 2003, however, Andrew Od represent a real date of issue. 5  He

- • 20 years into the reign of Co regnal date) - • 20 years after the Arab Conqu - • 20 years after the establishme Damascus  (i. e., about 681).

The confluence of two hypothese might be fixed at about 660 o supported by the recent conclusion of these coins (termed by them C late 650s or early 660s (see below

In the past 20 years, the a Constans II imitatives' struck in increasing detail, notably in Goo has come to be known as the 'Pse recently, as the Phase 1 coinage o related groups of coins have been product of a single mint. 9  Inde suggest that one of these mints became known as Hims to the Ara

Most recently, the Phase 1 Co the development of an Arab Umayyad) coinage for *Bilad al-S* this development has been post Schulze 11 based on their conclusi of the Pseudo-Byzantine issues c standards of coins from the offici of the year 20 mint to around 658 Foss in his recent catalogue of Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzan ***The coins and the possible prototy*** Most of the year 20 coins have a can be divided into three types: iting, no additional information is
mitted to include the name of the hun Li's *Illustrated Catalogue of* *91-1949.* The review was, in fact, apologies go to him for this

## icles

# MINT ' REVISITED nd S J Mansfield **Phase 1 (Pseudo** **-Byzantine)** **ly Islamic Syria** ** ** lar 'Byzantine-style' coins of a
published by Steve Mansfield. 1 e reverse set out as X / X and thus ducts of the 'year 20 mint'. production standards of the coins
own, and on the basis of a quite 2 Mansfield reached the tentative
be 'the product of a small mint, uced by a group of moneyers to ly decades following the Arab ddy suggested that year 20 might considered three possibilities: onstans II (660-661; i. e., a true uest (i. e., about 658-660) ent of the Umayyad Caliphate at
es that the operation of the mint or 661 is attractive and is now
ns of Pottier et al 6 that production Class III.2) should be dated to the w).
aforementioned 'larger range of n Syria has been studied in ever odwin's pioneering writings 7 and
udo-Byzantine Coinage' or, more of Arab-Byzantine Syria. 8  Other n identified and postulated as the eed, Oddy has gone so far as to
s was located at Emesa, which abs. 10 oinage has been treated as part of b-Byzantine (and subsequently *Sham*.  An overall chronology for
tulated by Pottier, Schulze and ions that the metrological pattern conforms to the declining weight
al Byzantine mints.  Their dating 8-663 has been accepted by Clive
the Arab-Byzantine coins at the ntine Studies. 12 ***types*** a facing bust on the obverse that
- • beardless (Class 1)
- • with a short beard (Class 2)
- • with a long beard (Class 3). 13

None of the specimens examined show a coherent obverse legend. Lettering is fragmentary and garbled and it is not possible to suggest with any confidence what, in this respect, the coins are trying to say.  The reverses of Classes 1 and 2 have a majuscule **M** surmounted by a cross and with an officina letter **A** below.  In addition, some coins of Class 2 have officina ∆.  To the left is И / И ** **and to the right**X**/**X**, with**O**И**O**or  ИО in the exergue. Class 3 has the 'officina' letters**A**, ∆ or**C**(the latter being a misunderstood or misengraved Є ), with**CO**\[**N**\] in the exergue,**A** **/** **O** **/** **N** to the left of a majuscule **M** and **X** **/** **X** to the right. Are there any obvious prototypes for the design of the coins of the year 20 mint?  One possibility is that whoever produced the coins had in mind for the reverse design the follis issue first struck in regnal year 20 of the reign of Heraclius, AD 629-630.  Like the coins addressed here, this follis (which must have been struck in huge numbers by the Constantinople mint) has **X** / **X** to the right of the denomination mark on the reverse.  Its obverse, however, has standing figures of Heraclius and Heraclius Constantine.  While, therefore, this coin cannot be a direct prototype, it remains possible that its reverse provided a ready-made design for a die cutter working at the year 20 mint who wanted to place such a date on his coins. By contrast, coins of the 20 th year of the reign of Constans II cannot be the inspiration for the year 20 mint as they have a standing figure of Constans on the obverse and standing figures of his three sons on the reverse.  The coinage  of the 15 th, 16 th and 17 th years of Constans' reign ( AD 655-658) (Grierson's Class 8), 14 however, does have a reverse that is similar to the year 20 coins - a majuscule **M**, with officina letter below, **A** / **N** / **N** / **O** to the left, date to the right, and **CON** in the exergue.  However, the obverse has standing figures of Constans II and Constantine IV. Nevertheless, if an ecclesiastical or municipal authority was looking to strike its own coinage in about 660 it is quite possible that it would model the reverse on that of the Byzantine folles of a couple of years earlier.  The fact that the date on the coins, year 20, fits into such a scheme (i. e., later than the dates of Class 8 by a few years) is supportive of **X** / **X** representing an actual date. Why, then, change the obverse so dramatically?  The vast majority of the Pseudo-Byzantine coins have, on their obverses, either three standing figures or one standing figure; there are some issues with two standing figures, while only a small minority have a facing bust.  That the Year 20 mint should choose a facing bust is surprising but certainly not without precedent. The prototype for the Class 1 beardless bust coins is most probably the **INPER CONST** issues that are attributed to Heraclonas (641) by Grierson 15 and Morrisson 16 and (more plausibly) to Constans II by Hahn, 17  but it could also be the early solidi of Constans II issued in 641-647 (Grierson's Class I). 18  It is known that these Byzantine gold coins entered, and continued to circulate in, Syria. 19  The regular gold coins could, therefore, have served as a prototype for coins of the mint even if the reverse design was based on a slightly earlier Constans follis. The year 20 coins that have a bust with a short beard (Class 2) are probably the best produced of the series and closely resemble the portrait on the common gold solidi of the reign of Constans which Grierson dates to around 647 - 651 (Grierson's Class II). 20 The coins that have a bust with a long beard were not included by Mansfield in his initial study but are now included as Class 3 because of their general similarity to Classes 1 and 2.  There are not, however, any die links to confirm the relationship.  The obverse of Class 3 probably copies the solidi of Constans II issued between 651 and 654 (Grierson's Class III). 21 ***The status of the year 20 mint*** The fact that the coins produced by the year 20 mint appear to derive from official prototypes does not imply that it could have been an Imperial mint, or even a semi-official 'Byzantine' one as
late as the 650s (and the idea of a Byzantine enclave after 640 now seems a little far-fetched).  Syria was completely under the control of the Governor (and future Caliph) Mu'awiya by about 641, but many aspects of government seem to have been left to the local administrations that had existed prior to the Arab conquest. With official coins, uncertainties about dating (for example whether the date is regnal or indictional) can often be settled by reference to other primary sources.  That is not possible here - it simply is not known whether it would have been possible for a subject people to produce a coinage in 660 or 661.  Our dating is, therefore, conjectural.  Nevertheless, there is a coming together of circumstances: the possibility of marking the anniversary of the reign, or some other important event; the need, in economic terms, for a local small-change coinage; and the circulation of several prototypes, recently issued by the Imperial administration in Constantinople, from which the design of the year 20 coins may have been derived.

From a modern perspective, it may seem decidedly risky for a Christian local authority to mark the twentieth year of the ruling Byzantine Emperor in this way, but hardly more so than the practice, characteristic of the entire Phase 1 (Pseudo-Byzantine) series, of placing an Imperial image on the obverse.  In fact, many of the Greek subjects of the new Arab state continued, for many years, to look forward to the day when the Byzantine Emperor would restore Syria to the empire. 22 In common with the PseudoByzantine series as a whole, the local administration in charge of the year 20 mint probably aimed to provide familiar-looking coins that would be likely to be accepted for circulation.  This criterion could be met by providing a Byzantine-looking portrait and a current date.  That the range of portraits used at the year 20 mint, from a beardless bust to a bust with a long beard, also mirrored the chronological development of the regular Byzantine coinage of Constans II was perhaps a further reminder to the local population that another 'regime change' was still to be hoped for. ***The coins and their dies*** Against the background of the evolving study of the PseudoByzantine coinage, the time seems ripe for a reappraisal of the year 20 mint, including a die study.  This is, in part, because more specimens from the mint are now known and because coins with a standing figure, or two figure, obverses combined with year 20 reverses are also now known.  The authors have examined 67 specimens in eight collections that belong, or might belong, to the year 20 mint.  This compares with the suggestion by Foss 23 that 40 coins were known.  Among the 67 specimens, there are three coins that are similar in fabric and style to coins of Classes 1 - 3, and which appear to bear a **X** / **X** date arrangement, but do not share common dies.   These coins, which have one and two standing figure obverses are listed in the catalogue. All the coins catalogued here are from trade and only one has a reported find spot, that being Cyprus.  Most of the coins came from Levantine dealers operating out of Beirut, suggesting a provenance in modern Syria or Lebanon.  However, other than being certain that the coins were struck within *Bilad al Sham* after the Arab conquest, nothing more specific can be said about the place of minting. ** ** ***The fabric*** The coins are thinner than contemporary Byzantine issues and give the appearance of having been struck on hammered out and cut down regular Byzantine coins.  Their generally eccentric shape is presumably due to the fact that two flans have been made from one hammered out coin. Only two coins (3 and 44) show traces of undertypes but in neither case is the original coin identifiable.  However, what can be seen on 44 is part of a countermark that had been applied at the edge of the original coin.  The countermark, of which only the lower part is visible, is either Schulze and Goodwin 24 Class 3 or Class 7.  The Class 3 countermark was applied almost exclusively to folles and half folles of Heraclius dating to around year 21 (630 - 631) and Schulze and Goodwin attribute its use in Syria to the  late 630s.  The Class 7 countermark was applied mainly to folles
and half folles of Constans II.  Most of the known specimens originated in Cyprus and it is assumed that this is where the countermark was applied. Examination of the die axes shows that the majority of the coins were struck at approximately 6.00h.  However, four coins were struck at 12.00h, five at 3.00h and three at 9.00h, showing that the dies were probably square in shape to enable the desired registration to be achieved.  It is clear that a collar was not used because of the spread of the die axes either side of 6.00h.  It is interesting to note that three of the 12.00h coins are from the same pair of died in class 3. The weights of 64 coins have been recorded (see figure 1) and the spread is from 2.1g to 6.3g with a clustering between 2.3g and 3.4g.  The weight distributions suggests a slight drop in desired standard from Class 1 to Class 3, but the number of coins available is too small for this to be certain. ***Die links*** The die relationships (see figure 2) show a progression from Class 1 (beardless; die O1) to Class 2 (short beard: dies O2 to O4).  Class 3 (long beard) is not die-linked to Classes 1 and 2 by dies but rather by iconography and style.  Class 3 may have been struck after a gap of a few years. ** ** ***Conclusions*** This paper recognises a third class of year 20 coins - those with a long beard (Class 3).  The Class 3 coins with a long beard differ in one other respect from Classes 1 and 2 in that the date arrangement in the reverse right field is **X** / **X** / **N, X** / **X** / **O** or 1 / **X** / **X** **.** **  **The third of these date arrangements could be read as year 26.  This would make sense as a real date six years after the issue of Classes 1 and 2 and go some way to explaining why there are no die links between Class 3 and the two other Classes.  However, if the 1 in 1 /**X**/**X**is significant, what can be made of the**N**and**O**in**X** **/** **X** **/** **N** and **X** **/** **X** **/** **O** respectively? ** ** The paper also draws attention to a number of other coins that may be related to the year 20 issues, including some with very different iconography.  Without die-link evidence, incorporation of the one and two standing figure coins into the output of the year 20 mint cannot be advanced with absolute confidence.  But, without much question, there are similarities between the coins in Classes 1, 2 and 3 and those catalogued here as "related".  There are a number of features common to both.  Allowing for the fact that portraying more than one figure requires a larger blank, all the coins discussed were struck to the module typical of regular coins of Constans II.  Most of the blanks seem to have been prepared in roughly the same way.  There is a broad stylistic uniformity to the Imperial portraits - they are slightly more crudely engraved compared with the products of the regular mints, but their standard does not sink to the level of many contemporary copies.  Most significantly, of course, all the coins seem to be trying to say either year 20 or just a few years later.

There are also other die-linked series within the PseudoByzantine coinage of Syria in which coins with a bust are die linked by reverse with those with one or two standing figures.  A full publication of these particular groupings is awaited, but some of the die links were published by Goodwin as long ago as 1993 25 and others more recently. 26

At present, Classes 1 and 2 must continue to be regarded as the core products of the year 20 mint, with good, if not decisive, arguments to support the inclusion of Class 3.  Discovery of further examples of apparently related coins, particularly if die-links are revealed, might expand our understanding of the activities of the mint still further. *Acknowledgements* The authors would like to thank several private collectors who provided illustrations and details of their coins for inclusion in this paper. *Notes and References        *

| of obverse dies. | He did not look closely at the reverse dies. |
|:--- |:--- |
| 3. In this paper, 'Syria' means the areas of the modern countries of |  |
| Lebanon, Syria, Israel and Jordan; known, historically, to the Arabs as |  |
| Bilad al-Sham. |  |
| 4. An ad-hoc group of scholars and collectors who meet in the UK |  |
| approximately every two years. |  |
| 5. Oddy, A., The Christian Coinage of Early Muslim Syria?, ARAM, 15 |  |
| (2003), pages 185 - 196. |  |
| 6. Pottier, H., Schulze, I., and Schulze, W., Pseudo-Byzantine Coinage in |  |
| Syria under Arab Rule (638 - circa 670) Classification and Dating, |  |
| Revue Belge de Numismatique, 154 (2008), pages 88 - 155. |  |
| 7. Goodwin, T., Imitations of Folles of Constans II, ONS Occasional |  |
| Paper number 28, 1993; | A Hoard of Imitative Byzantine Folles, |
| Numismatic Circular 102 (October 1994) pages 2 - 4; Seventh Century |  |
| Arab Imitations of Byzantine Folles, Numismatic Circular, 103 (1995) |  |
| pages 336 - 337; with Phillips, M. S., A Seventh Century Syrian Hoard |  |
| of Byzantine and Imitative Copper Coins, Numismatic Chronicle 157 |  |
| (1997) pages 61 - 87; Arab-Byzantine Coinage, Studies in the Khalili |  |
| Collection 4, London, 2005, pages 14 - 18. |  |
| 8. In an attempt to simplify the terminology applied to the Arab- |  |
| Byzantine coinage as a whole, Schulze and Oddy have suggested the |  |
| use of Phase 1, 2 and 3 for the issues formerly known as 'Pseudo- |  |
| Byzantine', as 'Umayyad Imperial Image' or 'proto Umayyad', and as |  |
| 'Standing Caliph' respectively. | Schulze, W. and Oddy, A., |
| Terminology for the Transitional Coinage struck in 7th Century Syria |  |
| after the Arab Conquest, in Goodwin, T. (ed.), Arab-Byzantine Coins |  |
| and History, London, 2012, pages 187 - 200. |  |
| 9. Oddy, A., Imitations of Constans II Folles of Class 1 or 4 Struck in |  |
| Syria, Numismatic Circular 103 (4) (May 1995) pages 142 - 143. |  |
| 10. | Oddy, The Christian Coinage, op. cit. |
| 11. | Pottier, Schulze and Schulze, Pseudo-Byzantine Coinage, op. cit. |
| 12. | Foss, C., Arab-Byzantine Coins, Dumbarton Oaks Byzantine |
| Collection Publications 12, Harvard University Press, 2008. |  |
| 13. | Mansfield, A Byzantine Irregular Issue, op. cit., did not include the |
| coins with a long beard, but sufficient examples are now known with |  |
| features in common with the other two types to suggest that they do |  |
| belong to the series, although there are no die links (see below). |  |
| 14. | Grierson, P., Catalogue of the Byzantine Coins in the Dumbarton |
| Oaks Collection (DOC): Volume 2, Part 2, Washington D. C., 1968, |  |
| page 454. |  |
| 15. | Grierson, DOC, op. cit., pages 396 - 397. |
| 16. | Morrisson, C., Catalogue des Monnaies Byzantines de la Bibliothèque |
| Nationale: Volume 1: 491 - 711, Paris, 1970, page 324. |  |
| 17. | Hahn, W., Moneta Imperii Byzantini: Volume 3: Von Heraclius bis |
| Leo III (610-720), Vienna, 1981, page 137. |  |
| 18. | Grierson, DOC, op.cit., pages 420 - 421. |
| 19. For discussions of contemporary sources alluding to the circulation of |  |
| Byzantine solidi, see Hoyland, R. G., Seeing Islam as Others Saw It, |  |
| Princeton, 1997, pages 84 - 85 and Kaegi, W. E., Byzantium and the |  |
| Early Islamic Conquests, Cambridge, 1992, pages 223 - 227. |  |
| 20. Grierson, DOC. op. cit., pages 423 - 424. |  |
| 21. Grierson, DOC. op. cit., pages 424 - 425. |  |
| 22. In the late 7th C work known as The Trophies of Damascus, the |  |
| anonymous author still feels a strong allegiance to Byzantine rule. | He | --- **Catalogue** **Key**

The catalogue is arranged in five columns, designated as follows:

Column 1: catalogue number of coin; a star indicates that the coin is illustrated; column 2: weight (grams); column 3: die-axis; column 4: dimensions (mm); column 5: notes. ** ** **Class  1**

| Obv: | Facing bust wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right hand.  in |
|:--- | ---: |
| field left; ∩Os/// reading downwards on the right. | Die O1 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, A below, И in field left and X/X in field right. Exergue obscure. Die R1 |
| 1. |  |
| 2.30 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 16-19 |  |
| 2\* |  |
| 2.70 |  |
| 9.00 |  |
| 17-21 |  |
| Obv: | Die O1 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, A below, И/И in field left and X/X in field right. CИO in exergue. Die R2 |
| 3. |  |
| 3.38 |  |
|  | 7.00 |
| 18-22 |  |
| Traces of an undertype |  |
| 4. |  |
| 3.28 |  |
|  | 7.00 |
| 18-21 |  |
| 5\* |  |
| 3.26 |  |
|  | 6.00 |
| 17-24 |  |
| 6. |  |
| 3.41 |  |
| 10.30 |  |
| 17-25 |  |
| 7. |  |
| 5.86 |  |
|  | 4.30 |
| 16-25 |  |
| 8. |  |
| 4.02 |  |
|  | 6.30 |
| 19-24 |  |
| 9\* |  |
| 2.44 |  |
|  | 6.30 |
| 16-19 |  |
| 10. |  |
| 3.05 |  |
|  | 2.30 |
| 16-25 |  |
| 11. |  |
| 2.28 |  |
|  | 6.00 |
| 18-22 |  |
| 12. |  |
| 2.29 |  |
|  | 6.00 |
| 16-18 |  |
| 13. |  |
| 4.62 |  |
|  | 5.00 |
| 18-26 |  |
| Class | 2 |

| Obv: | Facing bust with short beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the |
|:--- |:--- |
| right hand. | Traces of lettering to left; POИCO vertically downwards to the right. Die O2 |
| Rev: | Die R2 |
| 14. |  |
| 2.95 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 15. |  |
| 3.04 |  |
| 5.00 |  |
| See ref. 27 |  |
| 16. |  |
| 3.34 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 17-21 |  |
| 17\* |  |
| 4.46 |  |
| 4.30 |  |
| 17-25 |  |
| 18. |  |
| 2.78 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 15-22 |  |
| 19. |  |
| 2.66 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 17-20 |  |
| 20. |  |
| 2.22 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 13-18 |  |
| 21. |  |
| 3.41 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 16-18 |  |
| 22. |  |
| 2.57 |  |
| 7.00 |  |
| 15-24 |  |
| 23\* |  |
| 2.92 |  |
| 8.00 |  |
| 17-21 |  |
| 24. |  |
| 2.49 |  |
| Obv: | Die O2 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, A below, И/И in field left and X/X in field right. ИO in exergue. |
|  | Die R3 |
| 25. |  |
| 3.98 |  |
| 4.30 |  |
| 18-20 |  |
| 26. |  |
| 3.16 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 15-19 |  |
| 27\* |  |
| 2.94 |  |
| 1.30 |  |
| 11-21 |  |
| 28. |  |
| 3.06 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 20-22 |  |
| 29. |  |
| 3.34 |  |
| 3.30 |  |
| 12-15 |  |
| 30. |  |
| 3.65 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 15-21 |  |
| 31. |  |
| 3.09 |  |
| 7.00 |  |
| 15-22 |  |
| 32. |  |
| 4.62 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 16-23 |  |
| 33\* | 2.85 |
| 5.30 |  |
| 17-23 |  |
| 34. | 2.72 |
| Obv: | Die O2 |
|:--- |:--- |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, ∆ below, И/И in field left and X/X in field right. ИO in exergue. Die R4 |
| 38. |  |
| 2.38 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 15-21 |  |
| 39\* |  |
| 3.90 |  |
| 7.00 |  |
| 40\* |  |
| 2.76 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 17-22 |  |
| 41. |  |
| 2.51 |  |
| See ref. 28 |  |
| Obv: | Facing bust with short beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right |
| hand. | Traces of legend to left and right. Die O3 |
| Rev: | Die R4 |
| 42\* |  |
| 4.73 |  |
| 5.30 |  |
| 19-21 |  |
| Obv: | Die O3 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, A below, И/И in field left and X/X in field right. ИO in exergue. Die R5 |
| 43\* |  |
| 3.34 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 15-20 |  |
| 44. |  |
| 6.30 |  |
| 5.00 |  |
| 22-28 |  |
| Traces of an undertype |  |
| 45. |  |
| 2.37 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 15-18 |  |
| Obv: | Facing bust with short beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right |
| hand. | No visible legend. Die O4 |
| Rev: | Die R5 |
| 46\* |  |
| 3.39 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 17-23 |  |
| Obv: | Die O4 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, A below, И/И in field left. Right field and exergue not visible. Die R6 |
| 47. |  |
| 2.99 |  |
| 6.30 |  |
| 16-17 |  |
| 48\* |  |
| 3.31 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 16-22 |  |
| Class | 3 |

| Obv: | Facing bust with long beard wearing a simple coronet without a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right hand. |
|:--- |:--- |
| Traces of surrounding illegible legend. | Die O5 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, ∆ below. Left and right field and exergue not visible. Die R7 |
| 49\* |  |
| 3.07 |  |
| 6.30 |  |
| 17-23 |  |
| Obv: | Die O5 |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, C below, A/O/N in field left, X/X/N in field right, CO// in exergue. Die R8 |

*Obv:* **Die O5** *Rev:*  Majuscule **M**, with a cross above, **A** below, **A** / **N** / **O** in field left, **X** / **X** / **O** in field right, exergue not visible.  **Die R9** ** **55.  2.43 6.00 16-18**56\***2.49 5.00 16-23 57.  4.13 4.30 16-23**58\***2.47 4.00 18-26** ** * *
*Obv:* **Die O5** *Rev:*  Majuscule **M**, with a cross above. 'Officina' letter obscure.  Left field not visible.  1 / **X** / **X** in field right, exergue not visible.  **Die R10** ** ** **59\*** 2.70 4.30 16-21 60.  2.58 6.00 15-22 **Stylistically Related Coins**

None of these coins are die-linked into the above classes. **Beardless**

*Obv:*  Facing bust wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross.  Cross in left field. Traces of legend to right.  Traces of unidentified undertype. *Rev:*  Majuscule **M**, with a cross above, **A** / И in field left and **X** / **X** in field right.  Officina letter and exergue obscure. **61\* **3.74 12.00 17-27 This coin is typical of the Year 20 series in its weight, fabric and eccentric flan.**Short Beard **

*Obv:*   Facing bust with short beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a *globus cruciger* in the right hand.  Traces of legend to right. *Rev:*  Majuscule **M**, with a cross above, **A** below, **A** / И / **A** in field left and **X** / **X** in field right.  // Є **O** // in exergue. **62\*** 4.77 6.00 17-22 **Long Beard**

| Obv: | Facing bust with long beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right |
|:--- |:--- |
| hand. | Legend in right field reading ΓCO\[∆\]Є. |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, Γ below, and A/N/A in left field. Right field obscure. NA// in exergue. |
|  | 63\* |
| 3.76 |  |
| 7.00 |  |
| 20-23 |  |
| Obv: | Facing bust with long beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right |
| hand. | Traces of surrounding legend. (Same die as 65 below.) |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a K above, Γ below, and A/И/O in left field. Right field obscure. N├ in exergue. |
|  | 64\* |
| 5.42 |  |
| 3.00 |  |
| 17-27 |  |
| Obv: | Facing bust with long beard wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross and holding a globus cruciger in the right |
| hand. | Traces of surrounding legend. (Same die as 64 above.) |
| Rev: | Majuscule M, with a cross above, A below, and A/N/O in left field. Right field obscure. NI// in exergue. |
|  | 65\* |

*Obv:*  Standing figure in military dress wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross. Monogram in right field with **O** / И below. *Rev:*  Majuscule **M**, with a cross above, **A** below, **A** / И / И in field left and **X** / **X** in field right.  \[ **C** \] И **O** in exergue.  ( Same die as 67 below.) **66\*** 3.61 7.30 21-25 *Obv:*  Standing figure in military dress wearing a simple coronet surmounted by a cross.  Monogram in right field with **O** / **N** below. *Rev:*  Majuscule **M**, with a cross above, **A** below, **A** / И / И in field left and **X** / **X** in field right.  \[ **C** \] И **O** in exergue. (Same die as 66 above.)

|  | 67\* |
|:--- |:--- |
| 3.48 |  |
| 6.00 |  |
| 19-22 |  |
| These coins are included because of the Year XX and their eccentricity. | The reverse is typical of the main Year 20 series. | ---
**ON SOME COINS PUBLISHED BY DR** **SHINJI HIRANO** By Michael Fedorov In 2007, JONS 192 (pp. 19-20) included an article by Dr Shinji Hirano "Some novel pre-Islamic coins in Central Asia". This article was placed immediately after my article "Money circulation in Chach during the ancient period" (pp. 10-19), so that I certainly could not miss it. Hirano published previously unknown types of bronze and copper coins "from southern Sogdiana". It is not, however, clear whether the type 4 coin (see fig. 1 below) was from southern Sogdiana or elsewhere. All the coins seemed to have Sogdian legends. Of them only the legend on the type 3 coins was read. It proved to be **kšy'n'k xw** β \beta \beta β **''xwrpt** ( *Akhurpat Lord of* *Kesh* ). Neither Hirano, nor professor Yutaka Yoshida, who was helping him, managed to read the legends on the three remaining types of coins: "the legend looks like Sogdian script but no reliable words were determined", "the legend is written in Sogdian script but the only readable word is "pny" (money)". I, naturally, tried to read these legends but also could not manage it. I put the article aside but kept returning to it, now and then, trying to read the recalcitrant legends. Now, after five years, I have read the legend on the three other coins. The first of the legends that I managed to read was the one on the type 4 coin (see below). Regarding Hirano's coins 1 and 2, I could only suggest a partial and tentative reading as **pny** γ **w** β **w** **'wy'n...**. ** **The remaining three (?) letters remained enigmatic. As usually I kept returning to the intractable legend, now and then, trying to read it. In the process I became convinced that the first three words were**pny **γ**w**β**w 'wy'n **-** ** *coin/money (of) ruler Avian*. Finally I read the last, most difficult word. It proved to be **p'pn** - *Papan* (i.e. *Papian* or *of Pap* ). So that the full legend is: **pny** γ **w** β **w** **'wy'n p'pn** - *coin/money (of) ruler Avian Papan* (i.e. *Papian* or of *Pap).* *** *** ***Coin type 1***

** ** Weight 3.7 g. Diameter not given. *Obv.* Within a plain circle, a goblet-shaped tamgha, not previously encountered. Around it is a legend in Ferganian script: **pny** γ **w** β **w** **'wy'n p'pn**. Dr Hirano wrote "the legend looks like Sogdian script", but in fact it is the Ferganian script. The Ferganian script and the first Ferganian script legend on the early mediaeval coins was discovered by V. A. Livshits (1968, 230). *Rev.* Within a double linear circle is, as Dr Hirano described it, "a wavy line (tamgha?)". I would rather call it the S-shaped symbol or the S-shaped tamgha. ** ** ***Coin type 2*** Weight 1.9 g. Diameter not given. *Obv*. Within a linear circle a goblet-shaped tamgha, not previously encountered. Around it is a legend in Ferganian script: **pny** γ **w** β **w** **'wy'n p'pn** *coin/money (of) ruler Avian Papan* (i.e. *Papian* or of *Pap)*. *Rev*. Within a linear circle (?) is what looks like the same S-shaped symbol/tamgha, but partly worn out.

*** *** As Dr Hirano surmised, these coins represent different denominations. We have here a monetary system of two denominations with ratio 1:2. The coins published by Dr Hirano are extremely rare. In the comprehensive catalogue of O. I. Smirnova (1981, 88-422), containing 1685 coins, there is not even a single example of these types. Such coins remained unknown 22 years later (Fedorov 2003, 1-26). Perhaps they were an inauguration issue, struck when the ruler of Pap, *Avian*, ** ** was enthroned. Pap is a settlement in the Fergana valley, which exists nowadays with the same name. Arab geographers of the 9 th -10 th century wrote this name as   باب B ā b (there is no letter *P* in the Arabic alphabet). According to Qud ā ma (first half of the 9 th century), Ibn Khord ā dbeh (second half of the 9 th century), and Maqdis ī (c. 985), B ā b was a big, prosperous district, with much cultivation, on the right (northern) bank of the Sir Darya located four *farsakhs* (24 km) west of Akhs ī ket and five *farsakhs* (30 km) north-north east of Khw ā kand, nowadays Kokand (Bartold 1963, 218 -220; Bol'shakov 1973, 202-203). It is difficult to date these coins. Surprisingly (and frustratingly), Dr Hirano did not specify where and how these coins were found. Were these coins found in a hoard or at least in the same archaeological strata as other coins published by him, we could date the coins in question to the second quarter of the 8 th century because coins of *Akhurpat Lord of Kesh* were also minted in the second quarter of the 8 th century. In 722 Kesh was ruled by *V* ī *k*, who concluded a treaty with the Arabs. But in 727, a new ruler of Kesh, *xu* ə *t-pi* ě *t-t* ấ, sent an embassy to China (Smirnova 1981, 426). E. V. Rtveladze and A. Naymark (2004, 220) thought that *xu* ə *t-pi* ě *t-t* ấ could be identified as *Akhurpat*. A. Naymark wrote: "phonetically it is a very close rendering of the name *Akhurpat* ". I share their opinion. Whenever in some realm of Central Asia a new king was enthroned, he sent an embassy (with rich gifts) to China in order to inform the Chinese emperor about it. The "Son of Heaven" sent him the investiture (often purely symbolic) and rich gifts. So we can infer that *Akhurpat* came to power in AD 727. According to the Chinese chronicle, Kesh at that time was ruled by king *Iend* ū *n* who died in AD 738. So I date the reign of *Akhurpat* to the second quarter of the 8 th century, but closer to the beginning of it.

*Fig. 1. Dr Hirano's type 4 coin * Regarding coin 4, We start with the word placed above, as Hirano calls it, the "square window in the centre", or "central square window closed".  The second letter in this word is unmistakably δ or **l**. It is higher than all the other letters and slants slightly to the left. I read it as δ. On either side of it are two identical letters, which can be read as **y**, which gives **y** δ **y**. The next letter, bifurcated
at the upper end, has a tail going to the left, it is **k**. So we have **y** δ **yk**. Then follows the ligature **'w** which gives us a long vowel **u**. The last letter is **t**. And we have the Turkic title **y** δ **yk'wt** *idikut*. Now to the word placed upside-down under "the square window": the first letter is **x** or γ. Then follow **w**, **t**, **l**, **w** and γ. And we have **xwtlw** γ γ γ γ *khutlugh*. Turkic word *khutlugh / qutlugh / qutluq* means *happy / blessed*. It can be a name or honorary epithet. So the legend is: **y** δ **yk'wt xwtlw** γ γ γ γ **pny** *coin / money (of) Idikut Khutlugh.* I think that, here, *Khutlugh* is rather the name than the honorary epithet. If it were written **xwtlw** γ γ γ γ **y** δ **yk'wt pny** then the translation *Happy/blessed Idikut* would be more plausible. The title *iduk kut*, or *idik kut*, or *idikut* can be translated as "Sacred Happiness", or "Sacred Grandeur", or still better "Sacred Majesty" (Bartold 1968, 50; 1968a, 580). This title was not known for early mediaeval (or as some call it, "pre-Islamic") Sogd (at least so far), and was not met with on the early mediaeval coins of Sogd. But it is known in the lands situated to the east of Sogd (and, broadly speaking, western Central Asia). This title in the form of *iduk kut* is found on the Orkhon Turkic runic inscriptions, found in Northern Mongolia (Bartold 1968b, 320-321). In the grave-side stele of the supreme ruler of the Eastern Turk qaganate, Bilge Qagan (716-734), among the military campaigns, in which he participated, is mentioned the campaign of 703 or 704 against *iduk* *kut* (ruler) of the Basmil Turk tribe, who refused to pay tribute (Bartold 1968b, 321). Later, the same title (in the form of *idikut* ) and in the same place was held by the ruler of the Uighurs. Bartold (1968, 207; 1968a, 580) called the * *Basmil* *"perhaps the only sedentary Turk people at that time (at least in the east)". They were the first of the Turk tribes to settle down to a sedentary way of life and agriculture, and, in the process, assimilated part of the local sedentary population. They resided in the region of the town of Bishbaliq (B ī shb ā l ī q/B ī shb ā l ī gh). The Chinese chronicles called this town Pei-t'ing. It was north of Tien Shan, between the modern Chinese towns of Guchen and Urumchi, 47 km west of Guchen (Hudud al-Alam 1937, 272; Bartold 1965, 580). In the first quarter of the 7 th century, it was a frontier fortress of the Western Turk qaganate and key to Southern Dzungaria. But in 629 the Eastern Turk qaganate captured Bishbaliq. In 634 the Eastern Turk ruler of Bishbaliq, Ashina Shene, led his army to the east against his enemy, a Turk ally of China. On the advice of the Chinese emissary, the  Western Turk Qagan, Ishbara (634-639), captured Bishbaliq in 634. But in 640 the Chinese seized Bishbaliq and made it their fortress. In 651 the Western Turk qagan, Ishbara II (651-657), captured Bishbaliq only for the Chinese to retrieve it in 653. In 714 the Eastern Turks attacked Bishbaliq but were  defeated, But in 720 they managed to capture it. In 742 the allied forces of the* *Basmil,* *Uighurs and Qarluqs* * overthrew the Eastern Turks. In that same year, the Chinese emperor established the military frontier district of Pei-t'ing with its headquarters at Bishbaliq. A year or so later, the Uighurs and Qarluqs defeated the Basmils and from 744 the Basmils were incorporated into the Uighur federation. Towards the middle of the 8 th century, the Uighurs had Bishbaliq under their sway, but in 790 the Qarluqs, who, in alliance with the Tibetans, fought against the Uighurs, seized the town. In 795 near Pei-t'ing/Bishbaliq the Uighurs defeated the Tibetans. After that they took Pei-t'ing, which became Bishbaliq again. In 840, after 20 years of exhausting wars, the Kirgiz defeated the Uighurs and the Uighur qaganate came to an end. Some of the Uighurs went from Orkhon to Tien Shan. Around the year 847 they created a state in the region of Bishbaliq. Some ten years later, the Uighur ruler of Bishbaliq, in alliance with the Chinese, fought against the Tibetans and increased his state, having taken several towns and fortresses occupied by the Tibetans (in the Turfan oasis, near Urumchi and to the west of Urumchi). In 866 the Chinese defeated the Tibetans for good. The Bishbalik Uighurs, taking advantage of this Chinese victory, acquired some additional lands and consolidated their state. Despite this, the state was not big enough to constitute a khanate, nor for its ruler to be titled *Khan*. So the ruler of this state took the title of *Idikut* (Gumilev 1987, 198, 202, 212, 213, 226, 238, 239, 311, 320, 321, 363, 412, 416, 433, 434; Tikhonov 1966, 41-44) *.*

Now let us consider when the coin in question could have been struck. One very important feature for the dating of the coin published by Hirano is the  rectangular frame in the central part of the coin. This is certainly an imitation of a rectangular hole in the middle of the coin. From the second quarter of the 7 th century, bronze Sogdian coins were issued on the pattern of Chinese *Kai* *Yuan Tong Bao* coins and had a rectangular hole in the centre. Then around the end of the first quarter of the 8 th century, after the Arab conquest of Sogd, bronze coins appeared without the hole but with a rectangular frame imitating the hole in the middle of the coin. The first time such a frame is found is on coins of the Sogdian ruler whose name O. Smirnova (1981, 43, 166) read as **'wr'kk** ( *Urak* ) and Kh. Akhunbabaev (1986, 81-84) as **'prykk** ( *Afrig*, which in Sogdian is "Blessed"). The latter came to the conclusion that it was the honorary epithet of the ruler of Penjikent, Divashtich. Sogdian documents found at mount Mugh refer to Divashtich as the "Sogdian King, Ruler of Samarkand". V. Livshits (1979, 62-63) was of the opinion that Divashtich bore that title for two years. Akhunbabaev wrote that coins with the epithet *Afrig*, the tamgha of Samarqand and a tamgha related to Penjikent allow us to look at the problem from another point of view. In 718, the  king of Sogd, Ghurek, sent an embasy to China asking for help against the Arabs. The Arabs, having learned about his treacherous behaviour, appointed Divashtich king of Sogd. Akhunbabaev wrote that coins citing *Afrig* were issued in Penjikent in 719-720 when Divastich was king of Sogd. The present author (Fedorov 2003, 10-11) shared this opinion of Akhunbabaev. Coins of Afrig had frames, imitating a rectangular hole in the centre, both on the obverse and reverse. Some coins of such type could have been struck in Samarqand by the Arabs who made Samarqand their stronghold, once they had evicted  Ghurek, who resided in the new town of Afarunket, which he built for himself. Coins with the frame imitating a hole in the centre were also issued in Kesh (the eastern part of southern Sogd, in the Kashka Daria river valley) by **''** γ **wrpt** ( *Akhurpat* ). His coins, though, had only one frame, imitating a rectangular hole in the centre, on the reverse, just like the coin published by Hirano. As mentioned above, Naymark (2004, 220-221) wrote that Akhurpat came to power after 722 and reigned till no later than the end of 738.  This allows us to infer that the coin, published by Hirano, was issued about the end of the first or rather in the second quarter of the 8 th century AD. So far we have only one such coin found, presumably, in Sogd. So it is difficult to say whether this coin was issued in Sogd or in some other place, for instance in B ī shb ā l ī q. It is noteworthy that Hirano (2003, 19) had the impression that the coin in question "is reminiscent of coins found in Semirechie". On the other hand, this coin is made in the manner of some coins minted in Sogd after the Arab conquest of that country. The coins issued at that time in Semirechie had a proper square hole in the middle, and no imitations of the square hole (as far as I know). Hirano wrote: "a very thin Tiurgesh tamgha along with a hollow triangle can be seen on the reverse" (of the type 4 coin published by him). But the tamgha placed along the hollow triangle on the reverse side has nothing to do with Tiurgesh Qagan and Tiurgeshes (cf. fig. 1 and 2). The tamgha placed on the reverse of coins with the legend βγ \beta\gamma \beta\gamma βγ **y twrkyš** γ ʼ γ ʼ **n** **pny** is quite different (Smirnova 1981, 400).

** ** *Fig. 2. The coin of Tiurgesh Qagan* * * *References* ***  ***

Akhunbabaev, Kh. G. 1986. "Novye hakhodki sogdiiskikh monet iz raskopok 1978-1981 gg. v tsentral'noi chasti Afrasiaba", *Istoriia* *material'noi kul'tury Uzbekistana*  20, 81-84. Bartold, V. V. 1963. *Turkestan v epokhu mongol'skogo nashestviia*, *Sochineniia*, tom 1, Moskva. Bartold, V. 1965. "Bishbalyk", *Sochineniia*, tom 3, Moskva, 374-377.
Bartold, V. 1968. "Dvenadtsat' lektsi ī po istorii Turetskikh narodov Sredne ī Azii", *Sochineniia*, tom 5, Moskva, 19-192. Bartold, V. 1968a. "Tiurki", *Sochineniia*, tom 5, Moskva, 576-595. Bartold, V. 1968b. "Novye issledovaniia ob orkhonskikh nadpisiakh", *Sochineniia*, tom 5, Moskva, 312-328. Bol'shakov, O. G. 1973. *Srednevekovy* ī *gorod Sredne* ī * Azii*, Leningrad. Fedorov, M. 2003. "Money circulation in early-mediaeval Sogd (6 th - first half of 8 th century AD)", Supplement to *ONS Newsletter 175*, 1-26. Hirano, Shinji. 2007. "Some novel  pre-Islamic coins in central Asia", *Journal of the Oriental Numismatic Society*, 192, Summer, 19-20. Hugud al-Alam, 1937. Ḥ *ud* ū *d al-* ʼĀ *lam, 'The regions of the World', A* *Persian Geography 372 A.H.-982 A.D. Translated and explained by V.* *Minorsky. With the preface by V. V. Barthold († 1930) translated from* *the Russian*, London. Livshits, V. A. 1968. "Pis'mennost' drevne ī Fergany", *Narody Azii i Afriki*, 6, 230. Livshits, V. 1979. "Praviteli Pancha (sogdiitsy i tiurki)", *Narody Azii i* *Afriki*, 4, 62-63. Naymark, A. 2004. "O datirovke Keshskogo tsaria Akhurpata", *Transoxiana (Akademiku E. V. Rtveladze v chest' 60-letiia kollegi i* *ucheniki)*, Tashkent, 215-224. Smirnova, O. 1981. *Svodnyi katalog sogdi* ī *skikh monet*, Moskva. Tikhonov, D. 1966. *Khozia* ī *stvo i obshchestvenny* ī *stro* ī *Uigurskogo* *gosudarstva X-XI vv.*, Moskva-Leningrad. * * **ABOUT SOME UNKNOWN D** Ī **N** Ā **RS OF** **F** Ā **'IQ AL-HASS, GENERAL AND** **GOVERNOR UNDER THE  S** Ā **M** Ā **NIDS** By Vadim Kalinin (Moscow, Russia) ** ** In an earlier article we showed that the study of eastern jewellery, especially that involving the cast copies of various coin types, can bring significant results for numismatics.  These cast copies made for jewellery are sometimes based on coin issues or types that have otherwise not survived or, at least, not been noticed. During the last three years, I have acquired two identical replicas (Fig. 1 1, Fig. 2 2 ), which are cast replicas of S ā m ā nid dinars made in silver. One of them even preserved the trace of a rivet that was present on the prototype. Both coins are of Pakistani origin. These replicas clarify some questions of S ā m ā nid political history at the end of the tenth century and bring to light some previously unknown coins of this dynasty. The prototypes for these replicas were struck in the name of the S ā m ā nid ruler, N ū h b. Mans ū r, in Her ā t in AH 379. On the coins we find the *laqab* 'Am ī d al-Dawlat, that belongs to F ā 'iq, the S ā m ā nid general and administrative ruler of the second half of the tenth century AD. Apart from  the metal and the method of production (casting instead of striking), these replicas are no different from S ā m ā nid d ī n ā rs of the AH 370s - 380s. So here we have the remarkable situation of replicas based on coins that were hitherto unknown to us: coins of F ā 'iq from Her ā t, and gold coins with the name of F ā 'iq. *Fig. 1* 1 Zeno, No. 93020. 2 Private collection. *Fig. 2* Inscriptions of coins 1 and 2: *Obv.* in the field:

¢ / Ò»Ëf»A fÎÀ§ / É» ¹Íjq Ü / ÊfaË "A / ÜA É»A Ü / ¾f§ Inner marginal legend:

# ÉÖBÀR¼Q Ë ÅÎ¨Jm Ë ©nM ÒÄm ÑAjÈI iBÄÍf»A AhÇ Ljy "A ÁnI Outer marginal legend: Qur' ā n, XXX:3-4. *Rev.* in the field:

# iÌvÄ¿ ÅI \`ÌÃ / iÌvÄÀ»A ¹¼À»A / " ©ÍBñ»A / "A ¾Ìmi fÀZ¿ / "

Marginal legend: Qur' ā n, IX:33. Coin 1 - diameter 24mm, weight 1,90g; coin 2 - diameter 24mm, weight 2,30g.

The name of 'Am ī d al-Dawla F ā 'iq al-Hass, one of the most prominent representatives of the S ā m ā nid serving elite is inextricably linked to the events of the last decades of the S ā m ā nid state, where " *regions were mostly dominated by the rebels,* *government revenues declined, the soldiers dared to oppress* *people; rule passed into the hands of the Turks, and solutions of* *viziers lost power* ". 3 F ā 'iq's  name first appears in the sources in connection with the events of AH 350/961, when he helped his pupil, Mans ū r b. N ū h, gain a foothold onto the S ā m ā nid throne. After that, F ā 'iq is mentioned in the sources in connection with more or less every prominent event until his death in 389/999. In the history of the medieval East there are few politicians that stay in power for so long - 39 years. F ā 'iq was in power during the amirates of Mans ū r b. N ū h ( AH 350-365), N ū h II b. Mans ū r ( AH 365-387), Mans ū r II b. N ū h ( AH 387-389) and for the first few months of the penultimate S ā m ā nid am ī r, 'Abd al-Malik II b. N ū h ( AH 389). 4 During his long and violent political activity, F ā 'iq changed allies and opponents several times, with many of them, nonetheless, surviving and dying of natural causes. He was one of the arbiters of the S ā m ā nid state. In alliance with Ab ū 'Al ī Simjuri he summoned Bughra Kh ā n H ā r ū n b. Sulaym ā n, the Qar ā kh ā nid ruler in Transoxiana, who captured the capital city of Bukh ā ra in AH 382. That was the beginning of the end of the S ā m ā nid state. At the end of his life, F ā 'iq conspired with the S ā m ā nid commander, *h* ā *jib* Bektuzun, deposed am ī r Mans ū r II b. N ū h and enthroned his underage brother. Soon after, F ā 'iq died. The vicissitudes of the political career of F ā 'iq are listed in many sources of the 10 th to 13 th centuries, including Ab ū Sa' ī d Gard ī z ī 's *Zayn al-akhb* ā *r*, and Ibn al- Ā th ī r's *Al-k* ā *mil f* ī *al-ta'r* ī *kh*. In among the information about F ā 'iq's military activities, there is some evidence of F ā 'iq as a great statesman, rather than a warlord. Al-Maqdis ī, in a manuscript of AH 375, reports on the efforts made by 'Am ī d al-Dawla to join the Nishap ū r suburbs to the city 5, and to build a mosque in Tus, " *the best in Khuras* ā *n* ". 6 Studying the coins reveals that F ā 'iq received the title of 'Am ī d alDawlat ("Head of State", "Rest of State")  about AH 378 (judging 3 Nerchakhy M. *Description topographique et historique de Boukhara*, publ. par Ch. Schefer. Paris, 1892. P. 152. 4 Barthold V. V. *Turkestan v epokhu mongol'skogo nashestviya*. P. II. Saint-Petersbourg, 1900. P. 262-268. 5 *Materialï po istorii turkmen i Turkmenii*. Vol. I. Moscow-Leningrad, 1940. P. 199, note 1.  6 *Op. cit*. P. 204.
by coins of Sh ā sh and Samarqand of this year). The sources contain information that F ā 'iq occasionally ruled in the different governorships of the S ā m ā nid state. In AH 372 and 379 he was governor of Balkh, and in AH 382 - in Balkh and Tirmidh. The following numismatic data substantially refine and supplement the fragmentary evidences of written sources about his governorships. From AH 353 till 379, i.e. for 26 years, F ā 'iq's name was continually placed on dirhams of Sh ā sh. On dirhams of Samarqand his name was quoted in AH 354- 356, 364, 378-379 and 381. Fulus of Samarqand of 381-382 bear his laqab, 'Am ī d al-Dawlat. His name is also quoted on the fulus of Bukh ā ra of AH 358, and on dirh ā ms of Bukh ā ra of Mans ū r II b. N ū h ( AH 387-388, see Fig. 3 7 and Fig. 4 8 ) and of 'Abd al-Malik II b. N ū h struck in AH 389 (Fig. 5 9 ). On the dirh ā ms of Ā ndar ā ba, F ā 'iq is cited in AH 368-371. On the dirh ā ms of Balkh, he is cited in AH 368, 370-374, 376- 378, 380, 381, and on the fulus of AH 368. He is also cited on fulus of al-Khuttal of AH 368, on multiple dirhams of Warwal ī z of AH 370, 374 and on multiple dirhams of T ā liq ā n of 374. *Fig. 3* *Fig. 4*

*Fig. 5 * I suspect that this list is not complete, but even from this, it can be clearly seen that the geographical extent of F ā 'iq's awards for service was very wide - from Central Ma Wara'un-Nahr, including the capital city of Bukh ā ra, to Khuras ā n, Tokharist ā n and Badakhsh ā n. Her ā t in AH 377-378 belonged to the Simjurids, who ruled in Khuras ā n on behalf of the S ā m ā nids. According to the sources, the head of that dynasty, Ab ū al-Hasan Muhammad N ā sir al-Dawlat, died in AH 378. While there are many of his d ī n ā rs known of Nishapur of AH 377, no coins in his name for the year AH 378 are known.

7 Zeno, No. 112642. 8 Zeno, No. 114813. 9 Zeno, No. 68804.

In Herat in AH 377-378 fulus were struck with the name of his son, Ab ū 'Al ī. As the fulus of AH 377 are extremely rare, that can testify to the death of Ab ū al-Hasan occurring towards the end of

AH 377, and not in AH 378. After the death of his father, Ab ū 'Al ī asked N ū h b. Mans ū r's approval for his governorship of Khuras ā n. An honorary ambassador was sent to him with vestments of honour and a diploma for the management of Khuras ā n. " *But when the* *ambassador (to Ab* ū *'Al* ī *) had reached the road to Her* ā *t, he turned* *towards Her* ā *t, and there he found Fa'iq and the vestments and the* *diploma of ownership of Khuras* ā *n were delivered to him.  F* ā *'iq* *put on the vestments and then left Herat in the hands of Abu 'Ali."* * *

In AH 379 Her ā t belonged to Imad al-Dawla Abu 'Al ī Muhammad b. Nasir al-Dawlat Simjurid. We know from sources that " *Ab* ū *'Al* ī *wrote to am* ī *r N* ū *h, asking him to reconfirm his* *appointment as governor of Khuras* ā *n, and he \[N* ū *h\] agreed to it* *and gave him full control of Khuras* ā *n, while earlier Her* ā *t \[i.e.* *Khuras* ā *n\] had belonged to F* ā *'iq* " 10 and in the same year  " *In 379,* *Ab* ū *al-Qasim transferred Ab* ū *al-Hasan's ghulams and treasury to* *Ab* ū *'Al* ī *in Herat* ". 11 So it is clear that F ā 'iq ruled in Her ā t briefly at the end of AH 378 - beginning of AH 379. Coins of Ab ū 'Al ī sruck in Herat in AH 379 are known (Fig. 6 12 ), but coins of Her ā t of this year - dirh ā ms or d ī n ā rs - with the name of F ā 'iq were unknown. Nor were d ī n ā rs with his name, as described above, known. The fact that dinars were struck in F ā 'iq's name (albeit very sporadically) is confirmed by a copper coin of Sh ā sh of AH 366, struck from dinar dies (Fig. 7). 13 Here is a description of this remarkable coin. *Obv.* in the field:

# É» ¹Íjq Ü / ÊfaË "A / ÜA É»A Ü / µÖB¯ Inner marginal legend:

ÑBÀR¼Q Ë ÅÎNm Ë Om ÒÄm tBr»BI iBÄÍf»A AhÇ (!) jy "A ÁnI Outer marginal legend: Qur' ā n, XXX:3-4. *Rev.* in the field:

# iÌvÄ¿ ÅI \`ÌÃ / " ©Î¡À»A / "A ¾Ìmi fÀZ¿ / " Marginal legend: Qur' ā n, IX:33. *Fig. 6* *Fig. 7*

The narrative sources do not contain any indication of what post F ā 'iq had. Al-Maqdisi calls F ā 'iq am ī r 14. Numismatic and written sources give his laqab as 'Am ī d al-Daula and his honourable 10 *Op. cit*. P. 157. 11 Ab ū Sa' ī d Gard ī z ī, cited by edition: Abu Said Gardizi. *Zayn al-Akhbar.* Tashkent, 1990. P. 83. 12 Zeno, No. 104203. 13 Private collection. 14 *Materialï po istorii turkmen*... P. 199, note 1.
nickname, al-Hassa, *i.e.* "Excellent", that is mentioned on the coins of Bukhara (fulus of AH 358, and dirh ā ms of AH 387-388). I think the coins and sources known to date do not yet tell us everything about the history of F ā 'iq al-Hass.

**FOUR REMARKABLE** **IRANIAN CIVIC COPPER COINS** ** **By Alexander V. Akopyan (Moscow) & Farbod Mosanef (Tehran)** ** The first two coins of this article were struck during the rule of Ism ā ' ī l II Safavi ( AH 984-985), the second son of Sh ā h Tahmasp. His short reign was notorious for conspiracies and the murder of Safavid princes and commanders. When  Ism ā 'il was young, he was sent as ruler to Caucasia to deal with his uncle Alqas Mirza's rebellion in Shirw ā n.  Ism ā 'il led several campaigns against the Ottomans and his uncle, Alqas, who had supported Sulaym ā n the Magnificent, and gained several victories against them. After a peace agreement between the Safavids and Ottomans, Sh ā h Tahm ā sp sent  Ism ā ' ī l as governor to Khuras ā n. As governor of Khuras ā n, he appears to have been influenced by Sunni teachers to change some of  his beliefs, something that was to be noted later during his rule. It seems that certain reports about his conduct and the fear of rebellion by this young prince, caused Sh ā h Tahmasp to summon him to Qazw ī n. Here he was arrested and imprisoned in Qahqahe Castle for more than 18 years until his father's death. When Sh ā h Tahm ā sp became ill, disagreements between commanders of the Qizilb ā sh caused them to divide into two main groups - the Ust ā jlu, who supported Ḥ aydar Mirza, and an alliance of the Sh ā mlu, R ū mlu, Afshar, and Q ā j ā r, who supported Ism ā 'il. Ism ā 'il's followers had a very influential ally at the Sh ā h's court in the form of  Per ī kh ā n-kh ā num, the daughter of Sh ā h Tahm ā sp. She played an important role in unifying  Ism ā ' ī l's allies. After Sh ā h Tahm ā sp's death on the 15 th of Safar, AH 984, and because Ism ā ' ī l was not in Qazw ī n, Ḥ aydar Mirza produced a document that purported to confirm him as successor, and declared himself Sh ā h. But Ism ā ' ī l's allies and Per ī kh ā n-kh ā num announced another order of Sh ā h Tahm ā sp, and declared that Ḥ aydar Mirza's claim to the throne was fraudulent. This led to a serious conflict between the two sides which in due course ended with the killing of Ḥ aydar Mirza. Per ī kh ā n-kh ā num ordered Isma'il's succession to be proclaimed in public. Ism ā ' ī l himself, who had already eliminated his brother, was released from Qahqahe castle in Safar,

AH 984. He entered Qazv ī n and was proclaimed as the third Sh ā h of the Safavids in Juma'da al-awwal of that same year. Despite his first decree of clemency, shortly after he ascended the throne, Ism ā ' ī l II ordered many of his brothers and nephews and many commanders of the Qizilb ā sh to be killed. He restricted his sister's power, ordered her to step aside and forbade her from any involvement in decision making. These acts caused Ism ā ' ī l II to lose many of his followers. During his father's and grandfather's reigns little attention had been paid to the Sh ī 'a clergy. After  Ism ā ' ī l II took control of the Safavid empire, he ordered the power of the Sh ī 'a clergy to be restricted, and ordered the Sh ī 'a Kalima to be removed from the coins.  Ism ā ' ī l II replaced it with a poem that his grandfather had used at the beginning of a letter that he had sent to Sh ī bak Kh ā n Shayban ī 15 -

## زمشرق تا به مغرب گر امام است ** ** علی وآل او ما را تمام است

*zi-mashriq t* ā *beh maghrib gar im* ā *m ast*

All coins described in this article are from private collections. 15 Iskandar-bek, *Ta'r* ī *kh-i 'al* ā *m* ā *r* ā *-ye 'Abb* ā *s* ī, Tehr ā n, SH 1387, Vol. II, - 217; M. Mochiri, *Sekke shen* ā *s* ī *Ir* ā *n. Sekkaha-ye Isma'* ī *l II*, Tehr ā n,  1353, P. 352; Muhammad Y ū suf Valeh Isfah ā n ī, *Khulide b* ā *r* ī *n*, Tehran, SH 1372, P. 489-557.

*'Al* ī *wa* ā *l-i o m* ā *-r* ā *tam* ā *m ast*

*From the east to the west the imam is strength * *'Ali and his descendents (house) are everything for us*

This decision improved his reputation among some of his detractors who thought he was too favourable towards Shi'ism. In fact, Ism ā ' ī l II was not too strict about religion. He was a poet and his nickname in his poems was *'Adel* ī. 16 He also used the formula *huwa al-'adel* in the header of his farmans 17. Suddenly he was found dead one morning in Ramadan of AH 985. It seems he was poisoned by his enemies, but nobody  investigated the matter. He was 41 when he passed away. ** ** ***1. Ful*** ū ***s of Qasrat-i al-Dasht Ganja,*** ***AH*** * * ***984.*** ** **

*Fig. 1. Fal* ū *s of Qasrat-i al-Dasht Ganja,* *AH* *984 (coin 1)*

*Fig. 2. Fal* ū *s of Qasrat-i al-Dasht Ganja,* *AH* *984 (coin 2)*

*Fig. 3. Drawing of ful* ū *s* The first fal ū s is known to us in two specimens (Fig. 1 - 11.07g, 22\times24mm; Fig. 2 - 11.42g, 23mm). These coins were struck in Ganja (in the present-day Republic of Azerbayjan) and have a very unusual inscription on both sides. Because of the poor condition of the coins, the obverse inscription is only partially visible but we believe it can be reconstructed in the following way (see also drawing on Fig. 3):

## يافته

**\]** ز **\[** حطه حيدر لی **\[** از **\]** ** ** شرف سکه مس عادلی

*y* ā *fteh za* ḥ *i* ṭṭ *at* ḥ *aydar azal* ī * * *sharaf sikke mis '* ā *del* ī * *

This means "copper coin ( *i.e. cheap coin* ) of ' Ā del ī ( *Sh* ā *h Ism* ā *'* ī *l* *II* ) discovers ḥ *i* ṭṭ *at* because of the name of Ḥ aydar ( *i.e. 'Al* ī *ibn Ab* ī * * Ṭ *alib* )" (the legend reads from the bottom upwards). Here ḥ *i* ṭṭ *at* means 'door of forgiveness', and there are two had ī ths of the prophet Muhammad about the term ḥ *i* ṭṭ *at* both of which are well known among between Shi'a and Sunni. The first one is:

16 *Ta'r* ī *kh-i 'al* ā *m* ā *r* ā *-ye 'Abb* ā *s* ī. P. 207. 17 *Ibid*. P. 207.
انما مثل اھل بيتی فيکم مثل باب حطه فی بنی اسرائيل من دخله غفرله **  **

"My family ( *i.e.* im ā m 'Al ī and his sons, the grandsons of the prophet Muhammad) are like the  door of forgiveness ( ḥ *i* ṭṭ *at)* for the people of Isr ā 'il, \[and\] who pass this door ( *i.e.* accept them), they will be forgiven".

علی باب حطه من دخل منه کان مومناً ومن جرج منه کان کافر

' "Al ī is the door of forgiveness ( ḥ *i* ṭṭ *at* ), \[he who\] passes this door ( *i.e.* accept him) is a believer in God and he who refuses to pass this door ( *i.e.* does not accept him) is not a believer in God".

The inscription on the reverse of the coins is as follows:

\[ ضرب قصرة \] لا \[ دشت كنجه \] ف \[ ي \] ا \[ ر \] ب \[ ع و ثمانين و تسع \] مائة

ḍ *uriba qa* ṣ *rat-i al-dasht ganja f* ī *arba' wa tham* ā *n* ī *n wa tis'amiat*

' *Struck \[in\] Qasrat al-Dasht Ganja in \[the year\] 984* '.

The title *Qasrat-i al-Dasht* - the castle of the field - is known for Sh ī r ā z, 18 but was hitherto unknown on any coins. Moreover, no epithet, except for *mad* ī *nat,* was previously known for the mint of Ganja, that produced coins from AH 90 19. It should be noted that the date on the coin is engraved in the old style, i.e. written out, rather than using numerals as was generally the norm from the 9 th century AH onwards. Despite this coin being struck in the Shi'ite state, that was Safavid Iran, the coin bears a poem with *had* ī *th* that is acceptable to both Shi'a and Sunni about the im ā m 'Al ī, 20 which can be said to reflect Ism ā ' ī l II's tolerance of and respect for both sides. As we have already mentioned, Ism ā ' ī l II was accused of being less pious than previous Safavid sh ā hs - he replaced the Shi'a Kalima on the silver and gold coins with verses about the im ā m 'Al ī. It was an action that was not repeated until Sultan Ḥ usayn was defeated in AH 1135. ***2. A fal*** ū ***s of Sh*** ā ***h-i '*** Ā ***del, Qazv*** ī ***n,*** ***AH*** ***984.*** The second type (Fig. 4 - 11.50g, 19mm) also belongs to the time of Sh ā h Ism ā ' ī l II. This copper coin was struck in Qazv ī n in AH 984, after the death of Shah Tahmasp on the 15 th of Safar, AH 984. For some days Qazv ī n was faced with great chaos especially after the assassination of Ḥ aydar Mirza. Then Par ī kh ā n-kh ā num (herself killed in the following year) took control of the city and all the Qizilb ā sh *sardars* accepted her as head of state of the Safavid empire until the 27 th of Jumadi al-awwal, AH 984, when Ism ā ' ī l II was officially enthroned.

*Fig. 4. Fal* ū *s of Sh* ā *h-i '* Ā *del, Qazv* ī *n,* *AH* *984* On the obverse is the legend فلوس شاه عادل ** ** - *ful* ū *s-i sh* ā *h* *'adel*. On the reverse are the mintname and year:

ضرب دارالموحدين قزوين 18 *Ibid*. P. 725. 19 The first Umayyad coin struck in Gan ĵ ak/Janza (later and now known as Ganja) is dated 90 H. 20 Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Saffar, *Basair al-darajat*, Tehran, SH 1362, P. 317; Sadiq al-Shaykh, *Al-tawh* ī *d*, Qumm, \[no date\], P. 164-165; Sulaym ā n - Ahmad al-Tabar ā n ī, *Al-mu'jam al-* ā *wsat*, AH 1415, vol. VI, p. 85; Jal ā l  al-d ī n al-Suy ū t ī, *Al-j* ā *mi' al-sagh* ī *r*, Beyrut, AH 1401/1981, vol. II, P. 177; 'Ali b. 'Abd al-Malik al-Hind ī, *Kanz al-'umm* ā *l f* ī *sunan al-aqw* ā *l wa al-* *af'* ā *l*, AH 1409/1989, Beyrut, vol. II, P. 434-435.

The mintname, Qazv ī n, is preceded by the epithet,  *D* ā *r al-* *Muva* ḥ *ad* ī *n,* the one usually found on silver coins of  Ism ā ' ī l II for this mint. The other interesting aspect of this coin is the laqab or title  شاه عادل of Sh ā h Ism ā ' ī l II that was used on his farmans and in his nickname *'adel* ī. The weight of the coins of type 1 and 2 are very close to the 10-11g coins of *la'nat* type, produced generally in AH 982-995. ***3. A fal*** ū ***s of shah 'Abb*** ā ***s with duplicate legend.***

*Fig. 5. Fal* ū *s of Sh* ā *h 'Abb* ā *s with duplicate legend* *** *** *Fig. 6. Drawing of ful* ū *s*

*Fig. 7. The design of a Sh* ā *h 'Abb* ā *s* ī *flower on a rug* The third type (Fig. 5 - 16,75g, 3×2.5 cm) bears, on the obverse,  a pattern known as the *Sh* ā *h 'Abb* ā *si flower* that was a very common design on carpets and in architecture (Fig. 7). On the reverse of this coin is a quite unusual duplicate inscription (see drawing on Fig. 6):

## فلوس شاه عباس فلوس شاه عباس

*fal* ū *s-i sh* ā *h 'abb* ā *s fal* ū *s-i sh* ā *h 'abb* ā *s.*

From the style, we think it is safe to say that this is a coin of 'Abb ā s I rather than 'Abb ā s II. 'Abb ā s I ( AH 996-1038) was the fifth king of the Safavid state and one of the most powerful kings of this dynasty. During his brilliant rule Iran was involved in many wars, especially against the Ottomans and Shaybanids, as a result of which Iran both lost and recovered territory. The net result, however, was that by the end of his reign, the territory of Iran had been enlarged. Because of the very unusual legend on this coin, it is very probable that this coin was struck for a special purpose, Sh ā h 'Abb ā s I's reign being rich in important events that could have given rise to this coin. This is indicated by the fact that the coin was issued in the largest denomination, the *bist* ī (of 4 mithq ā ls of copper).  Precisely when and where it was struck we cannot tell as
| it is dateless and mintless21; | perhaps it was struck in the capital |
|:--- |:--- |
| city, Isfahān. |  |
| Citing the name of the ruler on the copper coins was |  |
| something very unusual for Safavīd times. It seems, that the coins |  |
| of Ganja and Qazwīn with the nickname of Ismā'īl II, described |  |
| above, and this coin with the name of 'Abbās I were the first in this |  |
| very unusual series of Safavid copper coins. Apart from these, | we |
| know only of an undated copper coin with the name of Shāh Safī I |  |
| (AH 1038-1052) from Tiflīs22. |  |
| 4. | A falūs of the island of Khārk, AH 1181. |

*Fig. 8. Fal* ū *s of Kh* ā *rk,* *AH* *1181 *

*Fig. 9. Enlarged part of the coin with the date * On the obverse of this coin (Fig. 8 - 7.67g, 22 mm) is the image of the sword *dhu-l-faq* ā *r* (Pers. *zulfagh* ā *r* ) - the bifurcated sword of im ā m 'Al ī. On the reverse is the inscription:. فلوس ضرب خارک ١٨١١ The denomination of the coin is probably a  *qazbeg* ī. Kh ā rk is an Iranian island located in the Persian Gulf, 60 km from B ū shehr, 40 km from Bandar-e R ī g and 35 km from Bandar-e Gon ā veh. In geographical sources it is called Kh ā rg, Kh ā r ā g or Kh ā rk. The island was well known as a good source of pearls, a fact that Hud ū d al-' Ā lam ( AH 371) seems to have been an early source to mention.

The very rare type of Kh ā rk pearl, known as *durr-e y* ā *tim*, was listed as the best pearl in the world by Ibr ā h ī m Istakhr ī 23 and Hamdall ā h Mustawf ī Qazw ī n ī. 24 Because of its geographical location and its merchandise, especially its pearls, Kh ā rk was an important trading centre in the Persian gulf.

During the Safav ī d period, European countries who had extended their trading networks eastwards, started to vie with each other in the Persian Gulf to obtain a greater share and greater profits from trade in this area and from the transit of goods to and from India and the Far East. As part of this process, they managed to get permission from the Safav ī ds to establish a number of trading posts in Iranian ports in the Persian Gulf. Thus did Portuguese, English, Dutch and French representatives of the trading companies try hard to obtain better deals  from the Iranian kings. After the assassination of N ā dir Sh ā h in AH 1160, there was civil war in Iran. As a result, the Iranian ports on the mainland were no longer safe for trade. This led the Dutch to seek to move their trading post to the island of Kh ā rk, that lay very close to the Iranian ports. This would give them more independence and greater security. It would also enable them  to put restrictions on

21 The pattern cannot help us locate the mint. The Sh ā h 'Abb ā s ī flower motif is frequently seen on rugs from many Iranian cities - K ā sh ā n, Isfah ā n, Mashh ā d, N ā ' ī n and, most commonly, on Tabr ī z rugs. 22 Kutelia T. S., *Gruziya i sefevidskiy Iran*, Tbilisi, 1979, P. 51-52; Paghava I., Turkia S., *Another autonomous copper coin bearing the name of Safi* // JONS, 189 (2006), P. 8-10. 23 Abu Ishaq Ibr ā h ī m Istakhr ī, *Mas* ā *lik al-mam* ā *lik*, Tehran, SH 1373, P. 143.  24 Hamd ā ll ā h Mustawf ī Qazw ī n ī, *Nuzhat al-Qul* ū *b*, Tehran, SH 1381, P. 196.

English shipping sailing to al-Basra. After negotiations with M ī r N ā sir, the Afsharid governor of Bandar-e R ī g, the Dutch obtained the right to use Kh ā rk for establishing their trading  post, and they built a castle for protection. Friendly relations between M ī r N ā sir and the Dutch did not last very long because his youngest son, M ī r Mohanna, killed him and became sole ruler of Bandar-e R ī g. After the rise of the Zands, Kar ī m Kh ā n took control of most of Iran, and he asked M ī r Mohanna to come to Sh ī r ā z. Once there, Mir Mohanna was denied permission to return to R ī g, but after some while, thanks to the pleas of his, i.e. M ī r Mohanna's relatives, Kar ī m Kh ā n sent him to Bandar-e R ī g as official Governor. It was not long, however, before M ī r Mohanna started to disobey and rebel against Kar ī m Kh ā n. He began to attack commercial shipping and caravans and created great problems for the Zands regarding the income they normally obtained from traders in taxes. After many attempts, Kar ī m Kh ā n defeated M ī r Mohanna in AH 1180, and forced him to escape to Kh ā rg ū (Kh ā rk ū ), a small island near Kh ā rk. Later in AH 1180, The Dutch, in co-operation with the Zand governor of B ū shehr attacked M ī r Mohanna, but were defeated by him. Thus encouraged, M ī r Mohanna took the bold decision to attack Kh ā rk, which he did successfully. In this way, M ī r Mohanna, obtained the great treasure and guns of the Dutch in Kh ā rk and became the most powerful man in commercial matters in the Persian Gulf. He forced the Dutch to leave Kh ā rk, thus reducing both their influence in the area and their impact on the British, who had moved their trading centre to Basra. The rise to power of M ī r Mohanna, his disobedience towards the Zand government and his restriction of trade in the Zand territory made Kar ī m Kh ā n very angry. As a result, he sent his brother, Zak ī Kh ā n, with a huge army to suppress him. Zak ī Kh ā n co-opted Ḥ asan Sul ṭā n, M ī r Mohanna's cousin, as his ally. Ḥ asan Sul ṭā n attacked him in the Khark bazaar. M ī r Mohanna fled with a few loyal guards on a boat to Basra. In Basra, M ī r Mohanna was recognised and handed over to the local Ottoman governor. After some time, in AH 1182, the latter ordered him to be killed in prison. It is curious, but the execution of M ī r Mohanna became one of the causi belli for his enemy, Kar ī m Kh ā n, to attack Basra in AH 1189. Kar ī m Kh ā n declared war on the Ottomans because he  announced that, although M ī r Mohanna was a rebel governor in Iran, it was Kar ī m Kh ā n's right, and his alone, to decide whether he should be put to death or shown mercy.

Nowadays there is a small island near Bandar-e Rig in the Persian Gulf called M ī r Mohanna in honour of this ruler. ** ** ** ** **RENDERING THE NAME OF HERACLIUS** **II (NUMISMATIC EVIDENCE)** By G. Gabashvili I would like to present a survey on the script of the name of Heraclius II (1744-1762-1798). This name of Greek origin (Heraclius) has two Georgian equivalents: *Erekle* and *Irakli*. In Russian sources the name is written *Irakli*, whereas in Georgian documents the name appears as *Erekle*, except in the case of the treaty of Georgievsk, where it appears as Irakli, son of Teimuraz. On the coins, researchers have varied in how they have read the name. - Barataev read the legends on the AH 1179 copper coins of  Heraclius II as follows (cf. copper shauri at Fig. 1) \[1, category IV, 11\]:

| ე Ⴐ | ე Ⴉ Ⴊ | ე |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
|  | e  R  e  K  L  e | (Heraclius) |

Thus, in the abbreviation of the name, Barataev read only three

Asomtavruli letters instead of six: ႰႩႪ ႰႩႪ ႰႩႪ ႰႩႪ ("RKL"). This is, without doubt, the  wrong way to read this name.
Reverting to the monogram with the name of H the two letters combined in the second block is - namely the letter « Ⴉ »- "K" (Fig. 9):

*Fig. 9 * * * The drawing of this block of letters shows a r sloping downwards from the left to the centre, a
large dot. When we remove the letter « Ⴉ »- "K" can be read (Fig. 10):

*Fig. 10 * * * Thus, from the first two blocks of the abbrev

Asomtavruli graphemes: « ႨႰႠႩ ႨႰႠႩ ႨႰႠႩ ႨႰႠႩ »-"IRAK". W read the letters: « Ⴊ » -"L" (Fig. 11): *Fig. 11* * * and « Ⴈ »-"I" in the third block. (Fig. 11): *Fig. 12* * *

The graphic representation of the last letter of is absolutely identical to the first letter of the na

| complete inscription on the coin «ႨႰႠႩႪႨ | ႨႰႠႩႪႨ | ႨႰႠႩႪႨ | ႨႰႠႩႪႨ»-"I |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Fig. 13 | Here, I shall consider one more coin of Heracl | this ah 1190 coin-type, the abbreviation is more | it is much easier to read each of the graph |
| interpretation even more convincing.  The lett | second block in particular is also clearly seen an | All letters are arranged  exactly in the same w | shauri (Fig. 1). |

*Fig. 13 * * * Here, I shall consider one more coin of Heracl this ah 1190 coin-type, the abbreviation is more it is much easier to read each of the graph
interpretation even more convincing.  The lett second block in particular is also clearly seen an All letters are arranged  exactly in the same w shauri (Fig. 1).

Mistakes rarely appear on coins of Heracli happen it is only with the dates, when the Eur Hijra date do not match.  In other cases, the min Heraclius II was executed perfectly, and the g the abbreviations on all three types of coins ar each other. Heraclius II, one of s quite easily legible relatively short line and terminating in a the letter « Ⴀ »-"A" viation we get four We can now easily the name - « Ⴈ »-"I" ame. Thus, we get a

# IRAKLI" (Fig. 13) lius II (Fig. 14). On e widely spread and hemes, making our ter « Ⴀ » -"A" in the nd very convincing. way as those on the
ius II and if it does ropean date and the nting of the coins of graphical images of re always similar to

*Fig.* * * Thus, according to the argument p state that the abbreviation represe should be read not as « ႤႰ ႤႰ ႤႰ ႤႰ

| 1. М. Баратаев | Нумизматически |
|:--- |:--- |
| Санктпетербург | 1844 г. |

## NUMISM **Aspects of money circul**

## Madras Pr By Han

Studying catalogues like the *Stan* one has the impression that the Presidency in the second half o different from the systems in m century or even the early 21 th ce coins have now been replaced by intrinsic value; at the time of th very different. For evident reason basis of the currency in Bengal a *kauri* shell, 25 the only kind of mo owned. Ibn Battuta, the famous M 14 th century that large numbers o Maldive islands to Bengal, and in importation was still valued at ab and early 19 th century sea transp safer the rupee price of *kauris* ra exchanged for 2400 *kauris*, in 175 6500 to more than 7000 *kauris*.

The value of the kauris varied the distance from the coast in fai gave the following exchange rate: 25 *Kauris* or *cowries* are the shells of 26  Alexandre Legoux de Flaix: *Essai*

*sur l'Indostan, avec le tableau de * *moyenne depuis 1702 jusqu'en* *1770*

Legoux de Flaix was born in 17 years in France. He returned in 1 *. 14*
presented above I can confidently ented on the coins of Heraclius II

# ႰႤႩႪႤ ႰႤႩႪႤ ႰႤႩႪႤ ႰႤႩႪႤ »-"EREKLE", but as tude to Dr Irakli Paghava for his ие факты Грузинского царства. ии. Тбилиси. 1970. ნუმიზმატიკა \[D. Kapanadze ლისი 1969.

# WAYS OF INDIAN

# MATICS

## lation in the Bengal and **residencies** ** ** ns Herlli *ndard Catalogue of World Coins*
currency system in the Bengal f the 18 th century was not very most countries in the early 20 th entury though the gold and silver

| a token coinage with a negligible | he EIC, however, the reality was | ns catalogues do not show the real |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| and some other parts of India, the | oney that millions of Indians ever | Moroccan traveller reported in the |
| of kauris were brought from the | n the early 19th century the annual | bout 30,000 rupees. As in the 18th |
and some other parts of India, the oney that millions of Indians ever Moroccan traveller reported in the
of *kauris* were brought from the n the early 19 th century the annual bout 30,000 rupees. As in the 18 th
ports became cheaper, faster and apidly decreased. In 1740 a rupee 56 for 2560 and in 1800 for about d not only with time but also with irly wide limits. Legoux de Flaix f *Cypraea moneta,* a sea snail. *historique, géographique et politique*

*son commerce, pris dan* *s une année* *0,* Paris 1807, vol. I, p. 237. 751 at Pondichéry but spent his early 768 to India where he worked as a
60 kauris = 1 poni 7200 kauris = 60 ponis  = 1 sicca rupee

In the *Useful Tables* we find the following table: 27 4 kauris   = 1 ganda 80 kauris = 20 gandas   = 1 pan (poni) 400 kauri = 5 pans = 100 gandas = 1 Anna 6400 kauris = 16 Annas = 1 sicca rupee At the end of the 18 th century, Legoux de Flaix wrote in his chapter about Indian coins: * * "In the past, Bengal and all the neighbouring provinces only knew *ashrafis* (mohurs), rupees and half rupees and finally *kauris*; but since the English have become the masters of these provinces they have introduced copper coins called *pessa* (paisa) or *cache* (cash), a coin which has great difficulties establishing itself in circulation." 28 There were two reasons why it took the copper coinage of the EIC a very long time to displace the *kauris*: the number of the available copper coins was insufficient and their value was much too high for the markets outside the commercial centres. Even the smallest British copper coin ever produced in Bengal, the 1/16 *anna*, was equal to about 10 *kauris* and the more common *paisa* cost around 40 *kauris*. The purchasing power of the copper coins can be judged from a statement by Legoux de Flaix refering to c. 1750: "These ( *kauri)* shells... serve as small change in Bengal and on the coast of the Deccan, and so abundant is everything in those happy and fertile provinces that for one of these shells a man can get a meal of bananas, a delicious fruit growing in this climate." 29 In Bengal *kauris* were not only used for small payments but even for land taxes. From 1778 to 1789 an annual average of 250,000 rupees of land revenue were collected in the Sylhet District in *kauris* at a rate of 5120 *kauris* per sicca rupee. The * * *kauris* were then sold at Dacca at public auction. 30 The *kauris* were only demonetised as currency accepted by the government treasuries in 1820. For Europeans and rich Indians the basis of the Mughal and especially the Bengali currency system was the silver rupee, but which rupee? After the death of the Mughal emperor, Muhammad Shah, the Mughal Empire disintegrated quite rapidly and more and more Mughal governors, Indian princes and European trading companies began to mint their own rupees. This coins usually still acknowledged the Mughal emperor as their issuer's nominal suzerain but in their silver content, which tended to decrease, most of them followed less and less the traditional Delhi standard. The majority of the new rupees were meant to circulate in a certain territory but some became the preferred currency of a trade or were used for special purposes. 31
military architect rebuilding the fortifications of his home town razed by the English. He later worked for Haidar 'Ali of Mysore building fortresses and undertaking political and economic reconaissance missions as far as Kashmir.

27 James Prinsep: *Useful Tables illustrative of the coins, weights, and* *Measures of British India, edited by Edward Thomas*, London 1858, p. 2. 28  Legoux de Flaix: *op. cit*., p.237.

29  Legoux de Flaix: *op.cit.,* p. 137. Though fractions of a *kauri* are a physical impossibility, the Hindus, who tended to have a passion for very big and very small numbers, also invented *kauri* fractions: 1 *kauri* = 2 *crant* = 4 *kak* = 5 *bat* = 9 *dant* = 27 *jou* = 32 *dar* = 80 *til* = 800 *sano.* (Sir Henry Miers Elliot: *Glossary of* *Terms used in the North-Western Provinces of India*.) 1 *sano* would have been equal to about 1/5,200,000 of a rupee!

30 The EIC had another market and did not depend on auctions for the disposal of *kauris.* Ships of the EIC and the VOC brought the shells to Europe where  there was a steady demand for them for the purchase of African slaves for America.

31 The Sikh Hari Singhi rupee of Kashmir became the coin of the shawl trade in northwestern India and the Salim Shahi of  Pratabgarh the currency of the opium trade in Rajputana and Malwa. In Rajputana marriage-guests, who were expected to bring an auspicious number of coins, - e.g. 101, 108 or 1011 - as presents, often chose the rupees struck by the Marwar *thakur* of Kuchaman that contained less silver than others and, therefore, allowed them to save some money. In the same region, the

Not much work has been done on where the different rupees really circulated and how and why certain rupee types were chosen for certain payments. In documents dating from the 18 th and early 19 th century we find thousands of mentions of rupee amounts but very often we do not know what kind of rupee was meant. Whereas *hundis* 32 usually name the type of rupees payable, historians or private letter-writers tended just to mention *rupees.* The following examples from the extensive surviving corpus of Persian letters of Major Polier 33 illustrate some of the problems and surprises a student of these documents encounters. The following excerpt of a letter sent by Polier from Lucknow to a business partner at Murshidabad is a typical example of a commercial document of the second half of the 18 th century: "I am concerned about your Rs 10,100 regarding the price of the elephants and I am trying my best for an immediate payment. There has been a discount over the *chalani* as the current account here is modelled after the Murshidabadi. And you know there has been discount ( *batta* ) over this. But it does not mean your loss. The fact is that here is a *batta* over the *chalani* in Murshidabad and your account is there. We all know what the amount of *batta* is for the Murshidabadi years. Thus there is no discrepancy in the accounts and there will not be a loss of a single penny for you. You will also receive the interest" 34 We learn from the letter that the *batta* at Lucknow followed the same rules as at Murshidabad (and at Calcutta and Benares) but it does not say to which kind of rupee it refers. *Chalani* rupees are often mentioned but as for commercial purposes every important physical rupee had to be accompanied by some kind of *chalani* or *current rupee,* which could be fictitous or real, * * this fact carries very little information *.* 35 The Nawab-Vizier of Awadh owned several mints but none near his capital, and we do in fact not know which rupee was mainly used at Lucknow, the seat of the Nawab, when Polier wrote his letter. When Polier's household manager travelled by boat from Faizabad, the old capital of Awadh, to Calcutta he received 50 Arcot rupees for expenses. The Arcot rupee was less popular at its place of origin, the Carnatic, where it circulated in competition with gold coins, than in East Bengal and Orissa, to where very significant amounts of rupees of the Nawab of Arcot, but also of French and English Arcot rupees were exported from the Coromandel Coast. Arcot rupees were not only struck in the south but also by the Dacca and Calcutta mints. The Arcot rupees from Calcutta were allegedly only struck for the regions of Dacca,

Banswara rupees were popular as presents to Hindu temples because they did not bear any legends in Persian script.

32 *Hundis* are Indian Bills of Exchange which were usually drawn on a *sharaf* or a big merchant.

33 Antoine Louis Henri de Polier (1741-1795) was a Swiss engineer officer in the service of the EIC who served in campaigns in Orissa and Bengal and, under Clive, became chief-engineer and commander of the garrison of Calcutta. As he was a foreigner, the directors of the EIC blocked his promotion to lieutenant-colonel and Polier was deputed in 1773 to the service of Nawab Shuja ad-Daula of Awadh at Faizabad. He was sent by the Nawab to support Najaf Khan, the Wazir of Shah 'Alam II, at the siege of Agra with heavy siege guns, and from 1776 to 1779 he commanded 7000 of Shah 'Alams sepoys. In 1779 Polier returned to Awadh, where he allegedly built the Faizabad Fort for Nawab Asaf adDaula, and from 1782 to 1788 he lived in Lucknow, nominally as a surveyor for the EIC, which finally promoted him to colonel, but in reality working for the Nawab. Polier, who was a friend of Warren Hastings and spoke Urdu and Persian fluently, knew many of the political actors in North India - e.g. Najaf Khan, Raja Chait Singh of Benares or the Nawabs of Awadh - well. He amassed, like his friend General Claude Martin, an important fortune via his private trade and became a generous patron of Indian artists. When Colonel Polier returned to Switzerland in 1788 he brought with him his large library of manuscripts and his collection of miniatures which are now shared betweem the British Museum, Eton College near London, King's College in Cambridge, the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, the Islamic Museum in Berlin and the Bibliothèque Cantonale in Lausanne.

34 Muzaffar Alam & Seema Alavi: *A European Experience of the Mughal* *Orient. The I'jaz-i Arsalani (Persian Letters, 1773-1779) of Antoine-* *Louis Henri Polier,* Oxford University Press, New Delhi 2001, p.226.

35 For an explanation of the *current rupee* see footnote 42.
Chittagong and Katak (Orissa) but the fact that a traveller from Awadh to Calcutta carried Arcot rupees for his expenses may mean that these rupees were also the preferred currency of other places in Bengal. 36 The correspondence of Polier with his *amil* at Khalilganj 37 in his newly acquired Imperial *jagir* shows that even an experienced trader and traveller could not know the bewildering currency system in all its details. Polier sent his *amil* for his expenses a *hundi* of 300 Dig rupees 38 struck in the 10 th regnal year of Shah 'Alam II to be cashed at the shop of Khemkaran and Govind Rai at Qasba Kol (Aligarh), but he later learned that the correct local currency would have been the Akbarabad (Agra) rupee of regnal year 7 and that there was a *batta* of 4 rupees to pay. 39 Polier even once mentioned a payment in the rather enigmatic *Rikabi* rupees. *Rikab* (stirrup) was used in Iran and India as a name for mobile mints that travelled with a ruler. Edgar Thurston wrote about Polier's *Rikabi* rupee: "The fact is incidentally mentioned that, when the Shahzada (Shah 'Alam) invaded Bihar, the mint accompanied him, and a large quantity of Benares rupees were melted down and coined into "rikabees" which were 1 rati 2 ch. deficient in weight, and of 64 chauwals assay, but were made to pass in the camp as sikkas of the established weight and fineness." 40  Shah 'Alam's *Rikabi* rupee, which probably bore the date AH 1174, would have been one of the worst coins of the region. As far as I know it has never been identified, described and illustrated in a numismatic publication. From about 1795 on we find in documents the name *Kaldar* rupee. *Kaldar* means "milled" and it was "up country", i.e. beyond the borders of the EIC territory, a generic name of the British machine-made coins in contradistinction to the hand-made coins of the princely states. The use of the term *Kaldar*   rupee in documents moved steadily westward as far as the Sikh empire and the Sind principalities, a clear harbinger of the coming dominant role of the uniform British rupee in India. Today rupees are usually defined by their external characteristics, their design (legend), weight and diameter and as a consequence we find in catalogues a bewildering multiplicity of rupee types, but for a contemporary of those coins their most important characteristic was their intrinsic value defined by their silver content, a point of view which leads to an even much larger number of rupee types. In the *Standard Catalog of World* coins the rupees struck in the name of 'Alamgir II and in the first 15 years of Shah 'Alam II at the Nawab-Vizier of Awadh's mint at Benares are now for example summarised in 4 types (KM # Mughal 459.1, 460.6 and Awadh 36.1, 36.2) but a person being paid in such rupees would only have been interested in the fact that, during 'Alamgir's reign, the silver content and, therefore, the market value of the Benares rupees changed 9 times and, in the first 15 years of Shah 'Alam, 7 times. 41 In the case of many rupee types the situation was further complicated by *batta*, a discount which was originally meant to compensate a coin's loss of weight and silver through wear and tear but which in the 18 th century had degenerated into a tool to enrich the *sharafs* and the issuers of the coins by driving them back into the mints. There were numerous different systems of *batta* and the one used with the Bengal sicca rupees before the introduction of the 19 *San* Sicca 1793 was among the simpler ones:

36 Muzaffar Alam & Seema Alavi: *op.cit.*, p. 107 37 About 25 km from Hathras.

38 Dig is a town 35 km northwest of the capital of the former Bharatpur State. Rupees struck at the summer residence of the Rajas of Bharatpur bore the mintname Mahindrapur but were known as Dig rupees.

39 Muzaffar Alam & Seema Alavi: *op.cit.*, pp. 351 and 365.

40 Edgar Thurston: "Note on the History of the East India Company Coinage", p. 7. Thurston's source was Mr. Barlow whose historical sketch of the Benares mint was published in 1792 in the *Calcutta Mint* *Committee* * * *Proceedings*. 41 A table of the silver contents of the Benares rupees can be found in: Edgar Thurston: " *Note on the  History of the East India Company* *Coinage from 1753-1835", JASB Vol. LXII, Part 1, No. I,* 1893, p. 6.* *

|  | 1st  year: | 100 Sikka rupees = 116 current or chalani rupees42 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|:--- |:--- | ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
|  | 2nd year: | 100 | " | " | = 113 | " | " | " |
|  | 3rd year: | 100 | " | " | =  111 | " | " | " |
|  | from 4th year on: 1 Sikka rupee = 1 Sonaut rupee43 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

All the *batta* systems had in common that, after a few years, the loss of value surpassed the cost of reminting and the old coin would then be brought to the mint for recoinage. 44 As there were about 25 major and many more minor rupee types in circulation in India and as large payments usually consisted of several types and years and quite often also of several counterfeit pieces only specialists were able to process such

42 "Accounts are generally kept in current rupees, which are considered, (though in themselves nominal, there being no such coin,) the standard to which all other denominations of money should be reduced: this is, in fact, the application of one term, whereby all others are to be appreciated. ( *Vademecum*, p. I,155.) The nominal and fictitious "current rupee" was in Bengal always equal to 16 annas or 192 paisas. In Bengal the *current rupee* also represented the value at which the government treasuries would accept the Sikka rupee: 86.207 Sikka rupees of the first year = 1  *current rupee.* After 3 years the Calcutta Sikka rupee was considered *sonaut*, equivalent to only 15 annas and only accepted by the treasuries as bullion.

43 In *Hobson Jobson* the authors wrote very much to the point: "The term * * *Sonaut* rupees, which was of frequent occurrence down to the reformation and unification of the Indian coinage in 1833, is one very difficult to elucidate. The word is properly *sanwat*, plural of Arabic *sana(t)*, a year. According to the old practice in Bengal, coins deteriorated in value, in comparison with the rupee of account, when they passed the third year of their currency, and these rupees were termed *Sanwat* or *Sonaut*. But in 1773, to put a stop to this inconvenience, Government determined that all rupees coined in future should bear the impression of the 19 th *san* or year of Shah 'Alam, the Mogul then reigning. And in all later uses of the term *Sonaut* it appears to be equivalent in value to the Farrukhabad rupee, or the modern "Company's rupee" which was of the same standard." (Col. Henry Yule and A.C. Burnell: *Hobson-Jobson, a glossary of colloquial Anglo-Indian words* *and phrases*,..., edited by Wm Crooke, London 1903, p. 775.) * *The* Hobson-Jobson* text is correct for Bengal but for the rupees of other mints the term *sonaut* would be differently defined. The following text by Edgar Thurston describes the situation at Benares: "In the 17 th year of the reign of Shah 'Alam (1776) the (Benares) mint was transferred by the Company to Chait Singh, who engaged to coin rupees of 9 masha 9 rati 6 ch. weight and 18 chauwals fine, and to continue the die of the 17 th san, in order to put an end to the confusion in the currency occasioned by the constant alteration of the value of the coins. "All rupees, therefore, coined in the Benares mint since the 17 th year of the present reign, ought to be of the same weight and standard, and to pass current as sikkas of the present year. The rupees current in the district of Benares may, therefore, be classed as sanwat and sikka, the former coined under the Mughal Princes, and the latter since the 17 th year of the reign of Shah 'Alam, when the mint was ceded to the Company by the Vizier (the Nawab-Vizier of Awadh), and by them transferred to Chait Singh." (Edgar Thurston: * op.cit*., p. 5. Thurston based his text on and used excerpts of Mr. Barlow's *Historical Sketch of the Benares* *Min* t, published in the *Calcutta Mint Committee's Proceedings,* 1792. On the 26 th of June 1826 a Special Court of Proprietors of East India Stock debated at the East India House in London the *Payment of Civil* *and Military Servants*. Halfway through the debate the chairman found it expedient to inform the baffled proprietors that all the payments of the Military Department of the Government of the Bengal Presidency were made in *sonat* rupees at an exchange rate of 111 sikka rupees = 116 sonat rupees, but that the military was not actually paid in *sonat* rupees, and that the accounts of the Military Department looked like the accounts of any other department, but when the troops were paid an officer of the Bengal army who was owed Rs 100 in the account book received only 95 1 / 2 Sikka rupees. The chairman saw no need to change this absurd system nor to reform the regulations of the Bengal Army, a monument to " *the wisdom of our ancestors* " three times as voluminous as the famously detailed Prussian Army Regulations. ( *Asiatic Journal*, vol. 22, September 1826.)

44 A number of books were sold in India which claimed to simplify the task of computing *batta* but most of them were full of errors. By far the most reliable was by Thomas Thornton: *The East Indian calculator, or,* *Tables for assisting computation of batta, interest, commission,rent,* *wages in Indian money with copious Tables of the Exchange between* *London, Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and the relative Value of Coins* *current in Hindostan,* London 1823.
transactions. A trader's handbook explained how these people worked: "When rupees are brought to a *sharaf*, he examines them piece by piece and arranges them according to their fineness; then by their weight; he then allows for the different legal *battas* upon *siccas* and *sonauts*; and this done he values in gross by the rupees current what the whole are worth, so that the rupee current is the only thing fixed by which coin is valued. A rupee current is reckoned at 2 s. and a Sicca rupee of account commonly at 2s.6d." 45 The procedure described here represented an ideal and was clearly extremely time-consuming and it partly explains why the Bengal currency system was estimated to support between thirty and forty thousand *shroffs.* The experts who processed large amounts - tens or even hundreds of thousands of rupees were not exceptional - proceeded differently: "I should premise, that, on account of the immense variety of coins current in India, it is customary, whenever any large sum is to be received, to employ an examiner, called a *podar*; who, having confined his pursuits to the acquirement of a most accurate knowledge of their several values, at once decides upon the correctness of a payment. The precision, quickness, and touch, of these persons, are beyond description. I have been assured that many of them can, even in the dark, distinguish between several kinds of money, whose size and weight bear no great dissimilarity: besides, even those coins that bear the same value, and come from the same mint, differ greatly in both those particulars; some being broad and flat, like a shilling, though not defaced; while others are more dumpy, and, though of purer metal, not so ponderous..... I shall give a short description of the *podar*; of whom mention has already been made. He is not always an attendant at an office, though, in great concerns, his presence is indispensable. He either receives from four to ten rupees per month, or is paid, by a very small centage, for whatever money he examines. We often admire the dexterity of our money-tellers; but the *podar*, who counts by fours, (i.e. *gandahs*,) finishes the detail of a thousand in so short a time, as would cause even our most expert money-tellers to stare with astonishment! It is only mixed money that is counted, when large sums are passing; most payments are first sorted; when the several kinds of rupees being made into parcels are weighed, fifty at a time: in this manner, a lac (i. e. a 100,000) may be speedily ascertained; each parcel of fifty being kept separate, until a certain number is completed: when the whole are accounted, and removed into bags, to make way for further operations." 46 Unlike all the token coinages of today the Indian currencies of the 18 th and early 19 th centuries - from the *kauris* to the gold mohurs - had an intrinsic value that approximately defined their exchange rates. Owning the mints, the Indian princes and the European trading companies were able to choose the standards of their coins and to dictate exchange rates as far as transactions with their own treasuries were concerned 47 but the fact that the markets

45 William Milburn and Thomas Thornton: *Oriental commerce, or, the* *East India tra-der's complete guide*, 1823.

46 Thomas Williamson: *The East India Vade-Mecum; or, complete guide* *to gentlemen in- tended for the civil, military, or naval service of the* *Hon. East India Company,* London 1810.

47 A student of the history of the EIC is often sorely tempted to see in the fiscal administration of the EIC in London and India before the introduction of the uniform coinage in 1835 a suite of bumbling committees trying to correct the mistakes of their precedessors and committing new ones. An excerpt from the *Madras Courier* (1823) shows that the bureaucrats in charge of fixing the exchange rates sometimes completely lost their way: "Omitting fractions, 335 Bengal Sicca Rupees are the equivalent exchange of 350 Madras Siccas, at which the Public Securities are transferable, and consequently, 350 Madras Siccas (or 100 Star Pagodas, at 8s. each) being the equivalent of £40, 335 Bengal Siccas should give the same sum. But the interest  Bills, payable in London, allow £ 40 or 320 Bengal Siccas only, at 2s.6d. each (the Company's Rate of Exchange), which is in favour of the receiver of the Bills 37 1 / 2 Bengal Siccas, or £4.13s.9d. Sterling per £ 100 against the Company. Again: - 335 Bengal Siccas, at 2s.6d each, give £ 41.17s.6d., and 350 Madras Siccas, at 2s.3d. each (the Company's rate of exchange), give
considered every kind of currency as merchandise left the control of the market exchange rate, which was much more important for most people, in the hands of the *sharafs* (or *shroffs* ), the Indian dealers in precious metals and monylenders. It was estimated that by constantly manipulating the exchange rates *sharafs* earned every year 30 to 35% on their capital. 48 The author of the *Vademecum* described the manipulations of the *sharafs* at Calcutta: "The up and down price of money, if I may use the expression, is managed by the shroff's, or native bankers, who invariably, except on particular holidays, meet towards midnight, compare accounts, and settle the value of money for the succeeding day. Notice is accordingly circulated in an underhand manner; and, throughout the great town of Calcutta, covering perhaps three thousand acres, and well peopled, the whole of the parties concerned, nay, even the ordinary retail shop-keepers, are apprized of the alteration. Sometimes the exchange is allowed to remain at the same rate for a few days in succession: this rarely takes place except when a particular currency, say silver, is to be bought up at a low rate, such as 58 or 60 pice to a rupee, to be sold again when the rate has been, for that purpose, raised to 64, or 65. So soon as either purpose is accomplished, the exchange alters by the same invisible means. The number of pice in a rupee constitutes its value; as the number of rupees and annas do that of a gold mohur; which, if sicca from the Calcutta mint, ought invariably to pass at sixteen rupees. But the regulations of government have too often been openly trespassed, in the most daring manner. This was carried to such a pitch, that the whole of the silver currency at one time disappeared; the shroffs and sircars had bought it all up; so that persons in business were induced to offer premiums for silver; without which mercantile concerns could not proceed. It is a well known fact, that, for some months, the troops at the presidency were paid in gold, issued to them at par; but which, owing to the infamous combinations above described, would not pass in any part of the mar-ket, unless a deduction of one-eighth was allowed!" 49

The army was the branch of the EIC that regularly stood in need of fairly large amounts of rupees and copper coins in places far from the capital of a Presidency or a mint. In Bengal the government did not even try to supply the requisite coins from Calcutta but adapted the *jagir* system of the Mughals, i.e. the revenue of a provincial treasury was assigned to a military unit: "According to the regulations, every man in the service ought to be paid monthly; but this is not always done, even in times of peace, on account of the collections, i. e, the revenues, being received only at particular periods: if nothing particular should occur to occasion the monies being otherwise appropriated, the deputy paymasters at the several stations receive notice, that the amount of

| only 83/4 | Rupees, according to the Company's valuation of 875 Madras |
|:--- |:--- |
| Rupees per £ 100, a difference against the receiver upon this footing of |  |
| not less than 132 Rupees upon every | £100. |

48  Legoux de Flaix: *op.cit.*, pp.139, 140. 49 Thomas Williamson: *Vademecum*, vol. I, p. 203. The *sharafs* were not alone responsible for all the abrupt changes in the exchange rates. Legoux de Flaix noted that the usual exchange rate of gold against silver was in India, as in Europe, 1:14 but that special circumstances could produce very different rates: "As gold is much easier to hide from the rapacity of soldiers than silver, the exchange rate may in case of a sudden invasion reach 1:20. When the famous Nawab Haidar 'Ali (of Mysore) invaded the Carnatic in 1781 and 1782 the population of the Coromandel Coast was so terrorised that the gold pagodas of Pondichéry or Madras, which normally were worth 3 3 / 4 rupees, did cost up to 5 rupees." (Legoux de Flaix: *op.cit.*, p.236.)
pay, due to the troops attached thereto, may be received; otherwise, it sometimes happens that two, three, or more months, elapse without any such notice being given. It is inconceivable to what inconvenience such delays give birth! No regimental paymaster, no regimental agent, no certain means of obtaining a supply of cash, in general, exist. Consequently, recourse must be had to the native money-lenders. When a notice arrives at the deputy paymaster's office, application is made by him for an escort, generally of a company of sepoys, under the command of an European officer, which proceeds to that civil station whence the supplies are to be derived. Sometimes, however, the escort is detained for many days, or even for weeks; this is usually owing to sudden calls for remittances having been received, when, of course, the escort had better wait for fresh receipts than return empty handed. 50 Payments to the troops are made in specie, generally in silver; the sicca rupees of Lucknow, Benares, Patna, &c., being held as *sonaut*, in which the pay of the whole army is calculated. When much gold is received at a station, but especially at the Presidency, that coin is instantly depreciated, to the great loss of every military man. In some instances, payments are made to troops by means of bills of exchange, payable at short dates: this answers very well for small sums, in situations not authorizing the detachment of a party to escort from a considerable distance, provided the party on whom the bill is given be a responsible man, which is very generally the case." 51 As the negotations with *shroffs* and Indian merchants and the complicated computations involved in exchanging fictitious *sonaut* rupees worth 0.9568 Calcutta Sikka rupees into whatever kinds of rupees were actually available to pay the troops were clearly beyond the competence of the average British paymaster he was given an Indian assistant: "For the convenience of keeping accounts, and of making payments, one *sircar* is allowed by the Company to each battalion of sepoys. It is surprizing to see how these men, whose utmost legal receipts can amount to only twenty rupees monthly, get forward, and become possessed of property. Much money goes through their hands, and every finger is a file which takes off a trifle en passant. Sircars form in fact a separate tribe of Hindus, and devote their time to one object, viz. making money. They generally read English well enough to know the contents of a bill; but, in giving receipts, usually sign their names in the Bengali character: Few of them undertake to write English accounts; but, in their own way, which appears to us prolix, they are extremely regular." 52

50 Thomas Williamson: *op.cit.,* vol. II, p. 227.

51 * *Thomas Williamson:* op.cit., * vol. II, p. 223.

52 In Bengal and especially in European's houses in Calcutta a *sircar* was a domestic servant who kept the accounts of the household expenditures, made purchases and served as a general broker in the relations with Indian *shroffs,* bankers and merchants. Though the profession had the reputation of being extremely greedy a *sircar* was an absolute necessity in a European gentleman's household: "The Sircar is a genius whose whole study is to handle money, whether receivable or payable; and who contrives either to confuse accounts, when they are adverse to his view; or to render them most expressively intelligible, when such would suit his purpose.... Many of them even set up as shroff's, or bankers, and establish such an extent of credit as would astonish the inhabitants of Lombard Street. Here it may be proper to remark, that no Sircar will take charge of money when his employer keeps the key, nor is it, on the other hand, customary for the sircar to have the entire charge. So many tricks have been played by changing the coin, that it is now a general rule for every treasure chest to have two large padlocks, of different construction; the *Sircar*, or *Tasildar* (cash keeper) receiving one key, and the master retaining the other. The Sircars derive a very considerable emolument from all purchases made in the markets, of whatever description. Whenever an European, even in person, buys goods of a native, his servants have, from time immemorial, a claim on the vendor of half an anna in every rupee the latter receives. This, which is called *dastur* i, or customary gift, being a thirty-second of the disbursement, amounts to no less than 3 1 / 8 per cent: it may therefore be imagined what immense sums these gentry must pocket, when serving gentlemen who have large establishments to support, and whose servants are numerous: for even from the very

The last quarter of the 18 th century was a period of rapid expansion of the EIC Presidency of Madras, of almost incessant warfare and of mismanagment of the local government by intriguing and corrupt officials. 53 Aurangzeb had granted the EIC in 1692 the right to mint Mughal rupees at Madras but most of these coins were exported to East Bengal and the legal currency was, as everywhere on the Coromandel Coast and most of South India, the gold pagoda. In a book written in 1789/81 Pierre Sonnerat described the principal pagodas then circulating: "The pagoda is a gold coin flat on one side and convex on the other; on the flat side it usually shows some Indian deities but so badly drawn that one can hardly recognise their traits. The pagoda is a merchandise like the gold mohur. There are many different kinds of pagodas. The ones current in commerce are: on the coast of Orissa the *Three Swami Pagoda*, at Madras and Pondichéry contracts are always made in *Star Pagodas*, and in the south, at Tranquebar, Karikal, Naour & Negapatnam, in *Portonovo* *Pagodas*. The *Three Swami Pagoda* is equivalent to 9 livres 12 sols; 54 on one side one sees 3 crowned heads, the other side - less convex than on other pagodas - is covered with dots: the gold is very pure and of a pale yellow. The *Star Pagoda* is worth 8 livres 8 sols; on one side one sees a figure, & on the other a star surrounded by dots. Old pieces, which are of a very pale yellow, are more highly estimated than the new ones of a gold of the colour of our jewels. The *Portonovo Pagoda*  is worth 7 livres 4 sols; on one side it bears a figure whose crown and ornaments differ from those on the *Star Pagoda*. The convex side is covered by dots. The gold is of the colour of our jewels & contains a lot of copper. The *Pagoda of Negapatnam* only differs from the *Portonovo* *Pagoda* by a few additional dots in the crown, the value is the same." 55

The troubles at Madras and the Anglo-Mysore wars led to an increasing dearth of gold coins exacerbated by the acts of the *sharafs*. As the army was also in Madras the government branch with the largest need of coins it became the main victim of this development. Innes Munro described the situation in a British regiment: "All our pay, excepting the king's, was for nine months out of the year issued in bills upon Bengal, which we were obliged to get discounted at the loss of thirty or forty per cent. Usurers, or monopolizers of specie, abounded at Madras, and the money so raised we were under the necessity of instantly expending upon liquors and other necessaries for the field; and these commodities were only to be purchased at the most exorbitant rates, as the Council never once took the least trouble in regulating the police of Madras, in order to prevent the oppressive impositions to which the army was always subjected. Such a step indeed might have
domestics does the *Sircar* claim the above gratuity, when paying their wages! (Thomas Williamson: *op.cit.,* vol.I, pp.200-211).

53 The famously corrupt governor, Sir Thomas Rumbold (1777-1780), was alleged to have diverted the enormous amount of £600,000 into his own pockets, and it was proved that he had been consistently remitting back to England sums three times as big as his salary but after having bribed the members in charge of the proceedings against him he was acquitted by a Parliamentary Commmittee 54 The currency system of the French  *Ancient Régime* knew the following coins: 1 *livre tournois* = 20 *sols* or *sous* = 240 *deniers*. In 1780 the purchasing power of a *sous* was comparable to an Euro of 2005..

55 Pierre Sonnerat: *Voyages aux Indes orientales et à la Chine, fait par* *ordre du Roi, depuis 1774 jusqu'en 1781...*, Paris 1782, (chapitre XIV ( *De la Monnoie* ), pp. I,256-263). Pierre Sonnerat (1748-1814), a French naturalist, visited the Moluccas, the Philippines and the islands near New Guinea  in 1769 -1772. The *Académie des Sciences* sent him in 1774 to the Coromandel Coast where in 1778 he helped to defend Pondicherry against the British. Back in Europe Sonnerat published his *Voyages aux Indes...* Sonnerat later returned to India where he became in 1790 the administrator of the French *Loge* at Yanaon and the commander of 6 sepoys. In 1793 he was taken prisoner by the British and only set free in 1813. Sonnerat and Legoux de Flaix were two of the most perceptive authors writing about India and its economy in the second half of the 18 th century but as they wrote in French they found few British readers.
proved prejudicial to their own private interests, and consequently, not likely to be adopted." 56 Colonel William Fullarton, whom the Scottish historian and philosopher James Mill praised as the first Anglo-Indian commander who looked after his commissariat, left in his polemic account of his campaigns in the years 1783/84 a description of the predicament the currency problems caused his troops: "On my arrival at Covanore, 57 I found that fanams amounting to a lack of pagodas had reached the camp from Tanjore. The impatience of the troops for this supply was proportioned to the severity of their distress; excepting the prize-money at Palagatcherry, and the working money to the parties employed on extra labour, no sums had been issued to the army during our whole progress, in crossing and recrossing India. Unfortunately the coin in which this payment was received, became a more copious source of discontent, than all the hardships they had endured. The star pagoda 58 is understood to be the only legal tender of your Presidency: it is not coined to the southward, but its place had usually been supplied by the Porto Novo pagoda, which is less valuable by ten per cent. The Rajah of Tanjore has not exercised the right of coining pagodas, and of late has paid his tribute 59 in fanams. The Dutch coinage at Negapatam formerly amounted to four or five lacks of pagodas annually, but this has been discontinued since we got possession of that city. As there is no gold coinage in any other place to the southward, nor any regular circulation of rupees, the whole currency of those provinces, exceeding the pagodas that happen to be in use, consists of fanams; of these every district coins a different sort, and no comparative rate having ever been established between the star pagodas and those inferior coins, their value fluctuates according to the relative demand, and the coinage of one province is seldom or never at par in another. Whenever it is known that a large issuing of fanams is at hand, the Shroffs, Soucars, and Dubashes, 60 purchase all the pagodas they can procure. Thus the fanams are kept at a high price, till the disbursement has taken place, and the rate is fixed at the current exchange for the day. But no sooner has this fluctuating coin been circulated, than the pagodas come forth, and in forty-eight hours the holders of fanams suffer a depreciation of six, eight, or ten per cent. Still more oppressive is this medium of public payment, when the fanams are issued in a province to which they do not properly belong: for the Tanjore fanam has no regular currency in any other province. And this applies to all coins of that description, fabricated in Trichinopoly, Madura, Tinivelly, Ramnad, and Shevigunga. 61 The commercial evils from this debasement and diversity of coin are not less considerable. A merchant cannot make a remittance to any place north of the Coleroon, without much trouble and expence in purchasing pagodas, or else by an unreasonable premium to Soucars. The money remitted to the army from Tanjore was issued in Tanjore fanams, at the rate of twentytwo and an half per star pagoda: but when the Sepoys received this money in distant encampments, they found that twenty-four or twenty-five fanams were required for a pagoda there; nor could

56 Innes Munro: *A Narrative of the Military Operations in the Carnatic in* *1780-4,* London 1789, p. 376. Innes Munro, who was related to General Sir Hector Munro, was a lieutenant and later a captain in the first battalion of Lord Macleod's 73 rd

Highlanders during the second Anglo-Mysore War (1780-4).

57 A place on the confines of the Marawa country, less than twenty miles from Madura. (F.)

58 The star pagoda is worth eight shillings. (F.)

59 The tribute amounts to four lacks of pagodas, or 160,000 £. (F.)

60  *Shroffs*, *Soucars*, and *Dubashes*, are money changers, bankers, and black agents of the Europeans. (F.) 61 A multitude of fanams circulated in South India. Sonnerat described and illustrated 12 then fairly common types of gold fanams, some of places as little known as Udaiyarpalayam, Ulundurpet or Alangeri. The values of these fanams varied from 15 sols for the Walajipet fanam to 5 sols for the Pulicat fanam, which outside its territory was only worth 2 sols. (Pierre Sonnerat: *op.cit.*, pp. I,260-263.)
they in many instances, without enormous loss, procure the necessaries of life for those uncurrent fanams. To prevent as much as possible the troops from suffering by a loss upon exchange, which in common justice should fall upon the public, it was proposed to Mr. Sulivan, 62 and immediately acceded to by him, that the paymaster should carry the difference to the account of the Company.... It appeared requisite to be minute in this recapitulation in order to impress the necessity of reform in the southern payments. This will be effected by ordering a large coinage of pagodas, and by establishing a tarif or proportonal value between the pagodas and fanams, in the same manner as in England twenty-one shillings are at all times equivalent to a guinea." 63 Travellers leaving India for Europe had, if they followed the advice of the Vademecum, a last chance to profit from the rupee chaos of which they had hitherto mostly been a victim: "Passengers from India ought to take a bag of rupees of the worst description; for, whether sicca or tersooly, each will be gladly received (at the Cape of Good Hope), without distinction, at two shillings and sixpence." 64

** ** **THE CIRCULATION OF TIN IN** **PALEMBANG (SUMATRA):** **ITS MONETARY AND NON-MONETARY** **FUNCTIONS:** **TIN AND LEAD INGOTS, ANIMALS AND** **TALISMANS** By  Michael  Mitchiner Palembang's geographical location was discussed in the previous paper (Mitchiner JONS 213, 2012). Palembang City is at the head of the delta of the river Musi, and the territory of the sultanate extended north-eastwards to include the island of Bangka where tin ore deposits were discovered in 1710. The present paper is concerned with looking at some of the ways in which tin was used during the period when Palembang Sultanate had a tin surplus in its economy, approximately 1710 to 1825. The recent finds at Palembang provide a unique opportunity for looking at the way in which tin was used in the society. The range of recovered artefacts is sufficiently broad to enable one to differentiate between various kinds of use and to consider the varied roles tin played in the economy. A distinct stratification emerges, with the sultan and his involvement with tin at the upper end of the spectrum. In the middle, one can consider the medium through which the sultan delivered tin into the market-place economy, and the forms in which tin circulated at this level. At the lower end of the spectrum were the metal workers in the market place. One can discuss a few of their wares and the ways in which tin products were used in local society.

62 Mr. Sulivan was the representative of the government at Fullarton's headquarters.

63 William Fullarton: *A View of the English Interests in India, and an* *Account of the mili-tary Operations in the Southern Parts of the* *Peninsula during the Campaigns of 1782, 1783 and 1784,* London 1787, pp. 188-193. Colonel William Fullarton (1754 - 1808), one of the most capable and successful British military leaders during the Anglo-Mysore Wars, commanded in 1783 and 1784, during the 2 nd Mysore War, the British troops south of the Coleroon river, the "Southern Army" of the Madras Presidency. In his book he criticised the EIC and attacked its policies. ** **

64 Thomas Williamson: * op.cit.*, vol 1, p.74 / 75. Any coin showing a trident or *trisul* could be called a *tersuli* or correctly a *trisuli* but in a Bengal context the rupees of the Benares mint bearing the regnal years 4 to 6 of 'Alamgir II and a *trisul* were meant. These rupees had various but always uncommonly small silver contents. (For Benares *trisuli* see: Edgar Thurston: "Note on the History of the East India Company Coinage", p. 6.)
By looking at the Palembang material, it is possible to dismiss as myths several concepts that have been advanced concerning the use of tin in a numismatic context. The truth appears to be more mundane. ***Background*** The tin ingots, animal pieces and talismans discussed here are, like the coins discussed in the previous paper, among recent finds from Palembang. Whereas there is a substantial amount of documentary information relevant to discussing the coins found at Palembang, there is very little documentary evidence relevant to the pieces now being discussed. In order to provide some comparative evidence, it is reasonable to begin by considering the situations in such neighbouring regions as the Malay Peninsula and Java. ***Comparison with the Malay Peninsula*** The period when tin mining commenced on a significant scale in the Malay Peninsula is reflected in Chinese literature. Fairly detailed descriptions of the various local kingdoms given in Zhao Rugua's (Chao Ju-kua's) maritime geography of ad 1225 made no mention of any local tin production and still described the general situation of Srivijayan tributary states. On the other hand, the report compiled by Wang Dayuan (Wang Ta-yuan), who travelled in the South Seas during the 1330's, described a very different picture of independent and rather more prosperous kingdoms where tin was a not uncommon local product. Wheatley (1961) has discussed this and given relevant translations. During the period that elapsed between these two reports, the ascendancy of the Sumatran kingdom of Srivijaya was replaced by the ascendancy of the more distant Javanese kingdom of Majapahit. Although Majapahit reached the height of its prosperity around the 1330's, its distant seat of power in Java compromised Majapahit's ability to control political and economic events in the Malay Peninsula (Hall 1968, 79-93). Under the new regime, the kingdom of Pahang on the Malay Peninsula grew prosperous as a tin producer. The extraction of tin gave Pahang its name in the late thirteenth century.  Like the other tin-producing kingdoms of the Malay Peninsula, Pahang, was to some extent torn between the conflicting commercial aspirations of the Siamese kingdoms (Sukothai, then Ayuthia) in the north and the Indonesian kingdoms (Srivijaya, now replaced by Majapahit) in the south (Hall 1968, 209). Ma Huan, writing in ad 1433, described tin mining in the Sultanate of Malacca (1403-1511) and the form of the ingots in which it was traded by the king. *"As to 'flower tin': there are two* *tin areas in the mountain-valleys; (and) the king appoints chiefs to* *control them. Men are sent to wash (for the ore) in a sieve and to* *cook it. (The tin) is cast into blocks with the shape of a tou-* *measure to make small blocks which are handed to the officials.* *Each block weighs one chin eight liang (1 lb 15 oz) sometimes one* *chin four liang (1 lb 10 oz), on our official steelyard. Every ten* *blocks are tied up with rattan to make a small bundle; (and) forty* *blocks make one large bundle. In trading transactions they all take* *this tin for current use"* (Wicks 1983, 298; Wheatley 1961, 321-4). Ma Huan described the large-size ingots used by the sultan in the course of state trade, in this case, the kind of tin ingots used when the sultan was selling his tin to Chinese traders. Raja Kasim Muzaffar Shah (1446-59) and Mansur Shah (1459-77) expanded the Malacca Sultanate. By the 1460's, it included not only Johore, but also the tin-producing regions of Kedah and Pahang, as well as Trengganu (Hall 1968, 211). The needs of merchants and metal workers trading in the Malacca market place would doubtless have been met by the use of smaller tin ingots. Their size would probably have been more closely aligned to multiples of the flat tin coins introduced by the Sultans of Malacca a few decades after the time of Ma Huan's report. The first two Malacca rulers to issue coins were Muzaffar Shah and Mansur Shah (Wicks 1983, 302-4). The Portuguese, who conquered Malacca in 1511, continued minting a subsidiary coinage in tin. The Dutch conquered Malacca in 1641 and almost immediately started their efforts to impose tin monopolies on the tin-producing
sultanates of the Malay Peninsula. In 1643, Phuket, sometimes known as 'Junk Ceylon', agreed to give the Dutch a monopoly on the purchase of tin produced in its territory (Hall 1968, 348). It took longer for the Dutch to agree tin monopolies with such other tin-producing states as Perak, Kedah, Ligor and Selangor (Hall 347-9). The overall result was that the tin producers had less tin available for their own purposes. The major expansion in the local use of tin, as reflected by the local coinages minted in the various states, came after the period of the Dutch monopolies. The British settled at Penang, off the coast of Kedah, in 1786 (Hall 354) and took Malacca from the Dutch in 1795, following the French Revolutionary occupation of Holland in that year (Hall 354-5). Their dominance over the Dutch was consolidated when the British settled on Singapore Island in 1819 (Hall 354). According to the terms of the Anglo-Dutch treaty of 1824, the Dutch agreed not to claim any territory in Singapore or the Malay Peninsula, while the British agreed not to claim any territory in Sumatra or Java (Hall 508-9). During the decades following British settlement in Penang, there were some conflicts with Siam concerning the allegiance of neighbouring Kedah. Such more northerly places as Ligor and Songkhla continued to acknowledge Siam. Tin production in the Malay Peninsula expanded during the nineteenth century. The rise in world demand for tin during the 1890's, and the accompanying rise in price, provided a boost to Malay production. Around 1900, Malay tin accounted for around half of all world production (Hall 565). With few exceptions, the production of tin coinages in the region is consistent with the economic outline just described. Very few states made tin coins before the late eighteenth century. Johore's tin coins belong to the Dutch period (Wicks 1983, 310323), and so do some issued in Trengganu (Pridmore 102-5; Mitchiner 1977, 3893-5; Wicks 1983, 343-7), although Wicks dates the introduction of Trengganu's tin coins to the late eighteenth century, shortly before they were first documented in 1789. A Malacca archive records Dutch permission given to Kedah  in 1642 to mint tin coins (Wicks 1983, 386), although Kedah's extant coins date from the nineteenth century. Tin coinage was introduced in a few states during the late eighteenth century, but the great expansion in tin coin production dates from the nineteenth century, and especially from the later part of that century. The minting of local tin coins ended shortly after 1900 (Pridmore 1969-74; Wicks 1983, 324-403). These brief comments make it possible to develop a perspective on the more exotic tin money of the Malay Peninsula. The title of Shaw and Ali's (1970) study on the *"Tin 'Hat' and* *animal money"* illustrates the scenario.  The items included in this title belong to two separate categories. Tin Hat money, whose local name is Tampang, were true coins. They stand out for their peculiar shape. Tampang were issued by the Bendahara (ruler) of Pahang throughout much of the nineteenth century, and have a Malay inscription citing the date and place of issue, which was effectively the Bendahara's guarantee. One can add that tampang passed from person to person in the market place at an accepted value. Abdullah, who travelled to Pahang in 1836, complained:* * *"The system of currency in Pahang is, to my mind, inconvenient.* *Sixteen tampang are equivalent to one dollar. A tampang cannot* *be divided, for instance into three-quarters, or a half or a quarter.* *If it is desired to buy anything however trifling a tampang must be* *paid for it "* (Wicks 1983, 324). Daly, who visited Pahang in 1875, recorded: *"Small silver coins of the Straits Settlements of India* *were unknown, but the dollar obtained currency. The tin extracted* *in the country is used as coin, the tin being flattened out in square* *pieces and stamped with the Bendahara of Pahang's seal; the* *centre part is raised or bulged, through which a hole is drilled and* *the pieces of money of the value of one penny or two pence are* *carried on a string. The change for a dollar is consequently heavy* *and cumbersome"* (Wicks 1983, 325). The issuing of dated tampang spans the period from ah 1235 (1819) to ah 1295 (1878). The general shape is similar throughout, although the size and weight vary. One can cite the issue of 1864. A representative tampang weighs 80.3 grams and measures 73x72 mm. It has a rectangular raised centre, surrounded by a flat rim. The Malay inscription on the rim reads: *"On the 1st of the month of Rabi al*
| 248. | (M3146) | Sn 100 %, | 39.0 g, | Bastardo, 1511 |  |
| ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 249. | (M3148) | Sn 95, | Pb 5 %, | 12,3 g, | Bastardo, 1521-57 |
| 250. | (M3150) | Sn 99+, | Pb - %, | 3.95 g, | Two bazarucos, 1557-78 |
| 251. (M3151) | Sn 95, | Pb 5 %, | Cu tr, | 3.95 g, | Two bazarucos, |
| 1557-78 |  |  |  |  |  |
| 252. | (M2152) | Sn 99+ | Pb - %, | 3.65 g, | Two bazarucos, 1557-78 |
| 253. | (M3153) | Sn 99+, | Pb - %, | 3.5 g, | Two bazarucos, 1557-78 |
| 254. | (M3154) | Sn 100 %, | 3.5 g, | Two bazarucos, 1557-78 |  |

| 255. | (M3105) | Sn 100 %, | 24.1 g, | "Lu Kun T'ung Pao", circa |  |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Made in tin-lead alloy |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Trengganu |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 256. | (M3117) | Sn 40, Pb 60, | Cu tr. | %, | 8.2 g, | Jokoh of Juru |
| Bhasa, circa 1895 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 257. | (M3118) | Sn 50, | Pb 50, | Cu tr. | %, | 7.5 g, Jokoh of Wee Sin |
| Hee, circa 1907 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 258. | (M3119) | Sn 50, | Pb 50, | Cu tr. %, | 7.3 g, | as previous |
| Brunei |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 259. | (M3137) | Sn 62, | Pb 36, | Zn 2 %, | 5.3 g, | Camel / Sultan al- |

*Magic coins * A characteristic class of coin-like objects was introduced in Java during the Majapahit period. These pieces are the 'magic coins' discussed by Cribb (1999). They illustrate scenes from traditional Javanese culture, including the traditions of the Javanese puppet theatre. They have remained popular in Java and Bali to the present day. There has been some modern spread to the Malay Peninsula, but Cribb did not cite any with a Sumatran provenance. The present author is not aware of any examples among the Palembang finds. As Cribb points out, they were not currency items. They are coin-like amulets that were used to drive out evil spirits and to bring blessings. **The tin and lead ingots, animals and talismans found at** **Palembang** The Palembang Sultanate acquired its own tin resource when tin ore deposits were discovered on Bangka island in 1710. Exploitation commenced shortly afterwards. The eighteenth century was the heyday of Palembang's prosperity. In addition to the local coins of Palembang, many cash-type coins issued by the Chinese mining communities on Bangka Island also circulated at Palembang city, as did the kinds of artefacts now being discussed. *The sultan and his tin* In 1710 to 1711, tin ore deposits were discovered on Bangka Island in the Sultanate of Palembang and the sultan was informed (Millies 1871, 117; Wicks 1983, 287-8). Mining and refining were organised soon afterwards. Millies (1871, 117-119) described how the operation was organised. Mining operations were supervised by a group of seven mixed-race officials, called Teko, who lived in Palembang and were answerable to the sultan. Each supervised the mining activities of the various Kong-sse (mining societies) in his particular part of Bangka Island. This phase ended when the Dutch divested Sultan Mahmud Badruddin II of his powers in 1821 and exiled him to Ternate. The sultanate was formally suppressed when Palembang came under direct Dutch administration in 1825 (Hall 1968, 576). The sultan owned the tin. It is apparent from the documentary evidence discussed here that the Sultan of Malacca owned the tin produced in the Malacca Sultanate, just as the Sultan of Palembang owned the tin produced in the Palembang Sultanate. Part of the newly mined tin was traded to produce income. The tin exported outside the sultanate was in the form of large ingots. The only surviving description of such ingots is contained in Ma Huan's (ad 1430. account of the 'flower tin' ingots weighing close to 2  pounds, which the Sultan of Malacca sold to Chinese traders (see above). The Sultan of Palembang would also have traded some of his tin in the form of analogous ingots. His principal customer is likely to have been the Dutch, although the author has not seen any reference to the Dutch imposing a tin monopoly at Palembang. Another use for the Sultan's tin was providing the low denomination coinage of the Palembang Sultanate in the form of small pitjis (cash) made in tin alloy. The period during which Palembang enjoyed an economic surplus in locally produced tin was marked by a major expansion in the minting of new coins. Both the volume and also the range of designs showed a major increase. Tin pitjis, or rather strings of tin pitjis, were the reference value for market-place commercial transactions. Mandelslo (1659, pp. 346-348), writing with reference to reports by Dutch travellers in the early seventeenth century, reported: on the money of Java *"which one calls Cas in Malay and Pity in Javan. It is current, not* *only at Bantam, and through all the Isle of Java, but also in all the* *neighbouring Isles. It is a base metal piece made of lead and of * *dirty copper, and it appears so fragile, that one cannot let fall a* *string of cash, without breaking ten or twelve"*.     *"It has a square* *hole in the middle, through which one can pass a thread of straw,* *and one thus makes a string of two hundred cash, which is called* *Sata, and which is worth around nine deniers, money of France.* *Five Sata, tied together, make a Sapocou"*. Diminutive cash of Chinese type, generally bearing Chinese reign titles formerly used during the Northern Song dynasty, came to an end in Sumatra around the 1640's (Mitchiner 2012). Thereafter, Palembang issued
small-size tin alloy pitjis bearing local designs until the Dutch suppressed the sultanate in 1825 and took Palembang under direct administration. During the later part of this period, Palembang enjoyed a local tin surplus from the time when the Bangka Island tin deposits were discovered in 1710. In addition to producing the local coinage, the sultan permitted the Chinese mining communities of Bangka Island to use some of the tin they were producing to mint their own coins (tokens). These pieces are significantly larger than the Palembang pitjis and have a square central hole. They measure 26 to 28 mm., and weigh in the range 3.0 to 4.7 g. These are biface coins with Chinese characters (2 to 4) and small ornaments on both obverse and reverse. Millies (1871, pp. 117-128; pl. XX-XXI, nos. 212-229) published some, and many new types have been included among recent finds from Palembang. A further role exercised by the sultan in relation to his newly mined tin was to deliver some of the tin into the market place economy of his sultanate. *Delivery of tin into the market place economy and the trading of* *base metals in the market place* The account suggested here appears to be the best interpretation based on the material evidence that has been preserved. The Sultan sold trade tin in the form of the large ingots already discussed. He delivered (sold) tin into the market place economy in the form of much smaller ingots, which would have been convenient to the market place. The sultan and his household needed to make purchases in the market, such as food and clothing. Trading tin ingots would have been one method of paying for those purchases and, at the same time, delivering tin into the market place economy. Tin circulated among traders in the market place in the form of small ingots weighing in the range 5 to 40 g. Several examples found at Palembang are catalogued below. They show a limited range of forms. Some are simple bars with a rectangular or circular cross-section, and with twisted-off ends. They would have been carried around in bags. Other ingots have the form of a rectangular plate, which was bent over in such a way that a string could be passed along its length. A man could carry a string of these ingots across his shoulder. When considering the market-place circulation of these ingots, the differences in form could have been significant. On occasions when the sultan delivered tin into the market place, presumably by selling tin ingots to local merchants, he probably sold the metal in the form of pure tin. When local merchants recycled old tin around the market place, the metal may have been pure tin, or it may have been alloyed with lead. The form of the ingot could have been a marker for the purity of its tin. Simple inspection suggests that the ingots with twisted off ends are made in pure tin, whereas the ingots that could be suspended as strings were sometimes made in tin-lead alloy. The only relevant analyses are the XRF examinations performed on the two Malayan 'boat-shaped' suspendable ingots catalogued above. They are made in tin-lead alloy of variable composition - a 20:80 and a 70:30 alloy of tin:lead. Lead was also traded around the market place. The lead ingots have their own simple and distinctive form. Palembang's lead ingots had the form of a mollusc shell. Manufacture was simple. Shells of bivalve molluscs were lined up and lead was poured into them. The resulting ingot had the shape of the interior of the mollusc shell. The size of the mollusc shells used varied widely, so the weight of the lead ingots was correspondingly varied. The range in weight is from 8 to 40 g. The Palembang shell ingots appear to be made of pure lead. The only relevant analyses have been performed on two simple conical ingots from Malaya, catalogued above. Each weighs close to 40 g and each is made of pure lead. The various kinds of ingots just discussed served as vehicles for trading metals in Palembang's market place. They were not monetary items. Palembang had a well-established reference for
value transactions. This was the string of cash (pitjis). By the time these kinds of ingots were circulating (circa 1710 to 1825), the alternative reference valuation for higher value transactions at Palembang was the Spanish silver dollar (8 reales: Wicks 1983, 281-282), a reference value that the Dutch had been using at Batavia since the early seventeenth century (Mandelslo 1659, 361). In different cultures where there was no other accepted reference value for commercial transactions, pieces of ingot form and variable weight were used as monetary references. Examples are the Katanga crosses of East Africa and the Tok money of Northern Thailand. The situation at Palembang was very different. Palembang had the well-established monetary references for commercial transactions just discussed, and metal ingots played no part in the local monetary system. In fact, Palembang provides a unique example for discussing which artefacts were monetary, and which artefacts were solely commercial, because the local finds have provided an unparalleled range of items recovered from a single city during a reasonably well-defined period in its economic history. The local economic situation makes it reasonably certain that the ingots discussed here were the medium for trading tin, lead, and their alloys in the market place, and that no specific monetary interpretation should be given to them. Was this how Palembang's metal market operated? The accumulation of more evidence, both material and documentary, would help to confirm, or modify, the simple trading pattern presented here. *Market place tin items made by metal workers* The metal workers of Palembang made a wide variety of products, whose range is not relevant to present discussion. Two classes of product are discussed here. The first class is tin animals, because such pieces are sometimes considered to be a form of money. The second class is talismans, because Porter (2011) has recently published a catalogue of Islamic seals and talismans whose geographical range did not extend east of India, so the examples discussed here extend the geographical range further east. The metal worker made items for which he had a market, in other words, items that people were willing to purchase. Some people wanted to buy tin animals and other people wanted to buy talismans. These were simple business transactions. The tin animals embrace a wide range. They include pigs, monkeys, cockerels, ducks, crabs and fish. Most are biface, with similar decoration on each side. A few are uniface. Their size is variable, with a weight range from 3 to 17 g. Palembang had its own established monetary system and these animals had no place as money items in that monetary system. The role played by the tin animals in local society appears to have been far more mundane and straightforward. It is suggested below that they were childrens' toys, the eastern equivalent to the tin 'farmyard animals' played with by children in the west. Children play, and in doing this they learn about their own culture and environment. Just because Palembang's tin animals were played with in south-east Asia, there is no reason for suggesting any exotic explanation for their role in society. The toys made the children happy and the talismans made their parents feel more secure. Amulets and talismans have been popular across the Islamic world for many centuries and analogous pieces have been used in other cultures. Recent finds at Palembang have brought to light several talismans of Islamic form. Porter's (2011, pp. 166-177) recent study of seals and amulets from the Islamic world includes a number of talismans, although the pieces studied did not come from as far to the east as Sumatra. One popular design is the 'Magic Square' and another is the 'Five Pointed Star' (Porter 2011, pp. 166 ff.). Both these designs occur on the Palembang talismans. The Magic Square is subdivided into a number of smaller squares. A popular arrangement is nine smaller squares, arranged in three rows of three squares. A number is placed in each square. In its most popular form, as the 'Buduh' square, the number 5 is at the centre. The other numbers, from 1 to 9, are distributed in the surrounding squares. The numbers are arranged in such a manner
that the sum of the three numbers, when read horizontally, or vertically, or diagonally, always adds up to '15'. There are numerous permutations on the basic design, some of which involve substituting letters, calculated according to the Abjad system, for the numbers. Two of the Palembang talismans catalogued here are tin alloy pieces with rings above for suspending them from a string around the neck. Each has a standard Buduh square on the obverse and a five-pointed star on the reverse. The Buduh square has number 5 at the centre, and the sums for horizontal, vertical and diagonal rows all add up to 15 in the normal manner. In the margins outside the magic square are the numbers 2, 4, 6 and 8. When converted into letters according to the Abjad system, the numbers "2, 4, 6, 8" give the letters "be, dal, waw, ha". In other words, the peripheral numbers name the design as being a Buduh square. Having noted the general features, there are significant minor differences between each of these Palembang talismans. Porter noted that the name Buduh is often given magical properties. This may have been the reason for naming the Buduh square on the Palembang pieces. Some magic squares are made up solely of the letters "b, d, w, h" (Porter 2011, no. A126). Magic Squares have also been used in other cultures. In a Hindu context, the 9-number Magic Square with the sum of all rows adding up to 15, is a reasonably common design on Indian temple tokens (Mitchiner 1998, 369-70, 400; 2012, 92-3, 102). A slightly different Magic Square with eight numbers adding up to 20 also occurs on temple tokens (Mitchiner 1998, 397, 410-13; 2012, 101, 111-2). The third Palembang talisman catalogued here is a heavier rectangular piece weighing 87 g, which would have been kept in the home. On this piece, there are four subdivisions to the magic square. Two contain numbers and two contain uninterpreted symbols. When the talisman is held one way up, the two numbers read 57 and 78. When it is inverted and held the other way up, the two numbers read 78 and 85. This is one aspect of its magic properties, that the numbers have been selected so that they are legible either way up. On a number of amulets catalogued by Porter, the number represents the numerical value for one of the "ninety nine" names of God, calculated according to the Abjad system. Porter (p. 134) and Codrington (1904, 40-42) have each given slightly different lists for the "ninety nine" names of God, but as each author makes clear, God has many more names and the number "ninety nine" is symbolic. The numbers on the Palembang talisman represent some of the names of God. The numerical value of (al-) Majid (the Most Glorious) is 57 (m, j, y, d). The numerical value of (al-) Hakim (the Wise) is 78 (h, k, y, m). The numerical value of Allah Wahid (Allah, the Only One) is 85 (a, l, l, h, w, a, h, d). Not only are the numbers fully legible when read either way up, but they also represent names of God when read either way up. Thus, al-Majid plus al-Hakim can be read one way up, and after inverting the talisman, al-Hakim plus Allah Wahid can be read the other way up. **Tin and lead ingots** The ingots discussed in this section should not be viewed as currency items. They are best viewed as the medium through which the Sultan of Palembang placed some of his newly mined tin into the market-place commerce of his domain, and the forms in which traders later circulated the tin and tin alloy, as well as lead, around the market place. The ingots show no consistency in their weights, which lie within the broad range from 5 to 40 g. The market-place metal worker was able to purchase the required amount of metal by putting together ingots of various sizes to make up the total weight he needed. Ingots with no means of attachment would probably have been carried in bags. Other kinds of ingot could be strung and carried around as a string of ingots suspended over a man's shoulder. It has been suggested above that the form of the ingot may have been a marker for the purity of its tin. The ingots with twisted-off ends appear to be made of pure tin, whereas the ingots that could be strung are made of tin-lead alloy.

| 5. | Rectangular cross section, with the ends pulled out and twisted |
|:--- |:--- |
| off |  |
| Tin, 62 mm, cross section 5 mm, 5.12 g, ex Palembang |  |
| 6. | Circular cross section, with the ends pulled out and twisted off |
| Tin, 81 mm, cross section 7 mm, 14.54 g, ex Palembang |  |
| 7. | Rectangular cross section, with the ends pulled out and twisted |

***'Boat-shaped' ingots that could be strung***

| 8. | Rectangular plate, bent over, leaving a channel for threading |
|:--- |:--- |
| string. Some grit in channel (from burial) |  |
| Decorated with a 6-rayed star, plus triangles in corners. |  |
| Tin-lead alloy, 66x13 mm, 32.98 g, ex Palembang |  |
| With rings |  |
| 9. | Rectangular plate, with central rectangle cut out, then bent over |
| to leave 2 rings at top and main joint at bottom |  |
| Tin-lead alloy, 40 mm, body 10 mm high, maximum height 15 mm, |  |
| 19.35 g, ex Palembang |  |
| 10. | Rectangular plate, with two rectangles cut out, then bent over |
| 11. | Mollusc shell interior |
|:--- |:--- |
| Lead, base 30x20 mm, height 25 mm, 38.20 g, ex Palembang |  |
| 12. | Similar, but much smaller |

***Animal pieces made in tin alloy, circa 1710 to 1825*** The tin-alloy animals discussed here were products made by metal workers in the Palembang market place. There is no reason for suggesting that the sultan had anything to do with their manufacture. The sultan possessed the tin mined in his territory and he delivered some of this tin into the market-place economy, partly in the form of the ingots already discussed. The metal worker in the market place was at liberty to make whatever kinds of artefacts he would be able to sell. This seems to be the context in which one should look at Palembang's tin animals. There is no reason to believe that the Palembang animals had anything to do with money, or with exchange transactions. Palembang already possessed a well-developed low-denomination coinage system mediated by small tin alloy pitjis (cash). There is no evidence that this coinage system was supplemented by the kinds of artefacts now being discussed. Wicks (1983; 1992) made a detailed study of South East Asian coinage, as well as contemporary documents relating to exchange transactions and the commodities used as reference values in such transactions. He found no evidence relevant to these animal pieces. Palembang's animals were simple metal-workers' products sold in the market place. What was their role in society? The most likely answer is that they were childrens' toys. Many people who grew up before the age of plastic will remember their 'tin soldiers' and the tin 'farmyard animals' they played with. Children played with these toys and, in so doing, they learned about the society in which they were growing up. Palembang's 'Noah's ark' of animals seems no more mysterious than a group of childrens' toys - a different range of animals from a western farmyard, but appropriate within the concepts of a different society.

| 13. | Cockerel, with ring below. Similar decoration on obverse and |
|:--- |:--- |
| reverse. |  |
| Tin alloy, 44x39 mm, 5.68 g, ex Palembang |  |
| "Cockerel rings" |  |
| Complete cockerel pieces are thought to have had more than one |  |
| ring below. Several pieces comprising a pair of rings have been |  |
| found at Palembang. One ring is normally slightly larger than the |  |
| other ring. |  |
| 14. | Pair of rings |
| Tin alloy, 35x17 mm, 3.07 g, ex Palembang |  |
| 15. | Similar |

**Pig** 16. Pig (three legs missing). Similar decoration on obverse and  reverse. *Tin alloy, 55x31 mm, 16.88 g, ex Palembang*

**Duck** 17. Duck. Similar appearance on obverse and reverse  *Tin alloy, 22x19 mm, 3.51 g, ex Palembang*
**Crab** 18. Crab. Uniface  *Tin alloy, 30x21 mm, 4.64 g, ex Palembang*

| 19. | Fish, with one dorsal and two ventral fins. Similar decoration |
|:--- |:--- |
| on obverse and reverse |  |
| Tin alloy, 39x20 mm, 6.96 g, ex Palembang |  |
| 20. | Similar, but much smaller (biface) |

| 21. | Magic square with number 5 at centre |  |
|:--- | ---: | ---: |
| 6 | 1 | 8 |
| 7 | 5 | 3 |
| 2 | 9 | 4 |
| Outside: | 2 | 4 6 8 |
| reading Buduh | (2=ba,  4=dal,  6=waw,  8=ha) |  |

*Tin alloy, suspensory ring lost, 28 mm, 6.14 g, ex Palembang * The sum of the buduh square numbers is 15 when read horizontally, vertically and diagonally. Inside square:  number 7 inverted and 6 reversed. Outside square:  numbers 4 and 6 reversed. See:  Porter (2011) pp. 166-177

22. Magic square with number 5 at centre  4    3    8 9    5    1 2    7    6 Outside:    2  4  /  6  8  /  2  4  /  6  8 reading:  Buduh  /  Buduh *rev.* 5-pointed star, with ornaments around *Tin alloy, suspensory ring above, 38x34 mm, 8.68 g, ex Palembang* Outside square: one number 2 reversed and one number 6 reversed. 22. Magic square with number 5 at centre  4    3    8 9    5    1 2    7    6 Outside:    2  4  /  6  8  /  2  4  /  6  8 reading:  Buduh  /  Buduh *rev.* 5-pointed star, with ornaments around *Tin alloy, suspensory ring above, 38x34 mm, 8.68 g, ex Palembang* Outside square: one number 2 reversed and one number 6 reversed.

***Talisman kept at home, illustrating a Magic Square citing names*** ***of God*** 23. Magic Square, subdivided into four subsections by a cross;  with both rectangular and diamond frames outside 57    symbol symbol 78 *rev.* Headdress of Indonesian form
| 78 | symbol |
|:--- |:--- |
| symbol | 85 |
| rev: empty flower vase |  |
| Tin, rectangular, 70x50 mm, 86.9 g, ex Palembang |  |
| The numbers stand for some of the 'ninety-nine' Names of God, |  |
| calculated according to the Abjad system. |  |
| 57. | Majid (The Most Glorious): mim=40, jim=3, ye=10, dal=4 |
| 78.  Hakim  (The Wise): | ha=8,  kaf=20,  ye=10,  mim=40 |
| 85. Allah | Wahid (Allah, the Only One): alif=1, lam=30, lam=30, |
| he=5, | waw=6, alif= 1, ha=8, dal=4 |

*References * Codrington, O.,  *A Manual of Musalman Numismatics*, Asiatic Society Monographs vol. VII, Royal Asiatic Society, London Cribb, J.,  *Magic Coins of Java, Bali and the Malay Peninsula*, British Museum Press, London 1999 Hall, D. G. E.,  *A History of South-east Asia*, 3 rd edition, 1968 Hanitsch, R.,  *Tin and Lead Coins from Brunei*, J. Straits Branch Royal Asiatic Society 1908, 111-114 Mandelslo, I. A.,  "Relation du voyages des Indes du Sr. de Mandelslo", pp. 83 - 648 in *Suitte de la Relation du Voyage en* *Moscovie, Tartarie et Perse*, tome second, Paris 1659. Mandelslo, himself did not travel further east than Ceylon  (p. 288, p. 517). He described the 'present state' of places further east, compiled from the best possible authorities.

Mitchiner, M.,  *Oriental Coins and their Values. Non-Islamic* *States and Western Colonies*, Hawkins Publications, London Mitchiner, M.,  *Indian Tokens: religious and secular art, from the* *ancient period to the present day*, Hawkins Publications, London Mitchiner, M.,  *Indian Medals, Tokens, Pictorial Plaques and* *Pendants, circa 1800 to 2010. The rise of modern India reflected* *in iconography; an insight into* *Indian Culture from mainstream* *traditions to the tribal art of rural India*, Hawkins Publications, London 2012 Mitchiner, M.,  "Coin  circulation  in  Palembang  (Sumatra), until circa AD 1710: including coins made in Banten, Siak, Kampar, Indragiri, Jambi, Palembang and Batavia", *JONS* 213, Autumn 2012, 22-38 Mitchiner, M. B. and Pollard, A. M.,  *Early South-east Asian* *Currency Systems*, Istituto Universitario Orientale, Supplemento - 65 agli Annali - vol. 50 (1990), fasc 4, Napoli 1990  Porter, V.  *Arabic and Persian Seals and Amulets in the British* *Museum*, British Museum Research Publications 160, London Pridmore, F.,  "The native coinages of the Malay Peninsula", *Spink* *Numismatic Circular* (serialised) 1969 to 1974 Pridmore, F., and Wodak, E.,  "Tampang", *Spink Numismatic* *Circular*, 1954, 285 Shaw, W. and Ali, M. K. H.,  *Tin 'Hat' and Animal Money*, Muzium Nagara, Kuala Lumpur, 1970 Singh, S.,  *The Catalogue of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei* *Coins*, 1700-1974, Kuala Lumpur 1974 Wheatley,  P.,  *The Golden Khersonese: Studies in the historical* *geography of the Malay Peninsula before AD 1500*, University of Malaya Press, Kuala Lumpur 1961 Wicks, R. S.,  *A survey of native South-east Asian coinages, circa* *450-1850: documentation and typology*, PhD Thesis, Cornell University, May 1983 Wicks, R. S.,  *Money, Markets, and Trade in Early Southeast Asia:* *the development of indigenous monetary systems to AD 1400*, Southeast Asia program, Cornell University, New York 1992 Wodak, E. and Pridmore, F.,  'The "Poot" tin ingot money of Junk Ceylon', *Spink Numismatic Circular* 1956, 71-74, 119-123 and 167-171

**SOME SILVER COINS OF THE SAFAVID** **RULER, ISMA'IL II** In their article on four Iranian copper coins, starting on page 15 of this issue, Alexander Akopyan and Farbod Mosanef mention the fact that Isma'il II replaced the Kalima on his silver coins with a couplet. We present here a few examples of this coinage. Because of his short reign, the coins of this ruler are scarce. They are also often poorly struck, with areas of flatness, as was common with Safavid coins of this period. Most of the coins are two shahi pieces weighing around 4.6-4.7 g, but single shahis are also known. These couplet coins are known from several mints, including Fuman, Ganja, Hamadan, Iravan, Isfahan, Kashan, Kuchesfan, Qazvin, Rasht, Shimakhi, Shiraz, Tabriz, Yazd. Where the date is visible, it is usually AH 984, but some coins of 985 are also known.

The obverse of this type has the ruler's name and titles:

## السلطان

العادل أبو المظفر شاه اسمعيل بن طھماسب شاه الصفوی خالد ﷲ ملکه

*al-sul* ṭā *n al-'* ā *dil ab* ū *'l mu* ẓ *affar sh* ā *h isma'* ī *l bin* ṭ *ahm* ā *sp sh* ā *h al-* ṣ *afav* ī *khallada all* ā *h mulkahu* and also the mintname and date, when visible. ---
All coins of Kachar are very rare. Megha Narayana reigned from 1566 to 1583. This particular coin will be in the second of the north-east India auctions but similar tankas will feature in this year's auction. The legends read:

Obv: *Hara Gaur* ī */ Charana Par* ā */yana H* ā *cheng/s* ā *Vam* ś *aja* Rev.: Ś *ri* Ś *ri Me/gah N* ā *r* ā *yana/ Bhu p* ā *lasya /* Ś *ake 1488*

*Cooch Behar / Mughal: half rupee of Aurangzeb, year 4 *

In 1661, during the reign of Prana Narayana, Cooch Behar was invaded by the Mughals under Mir Jumla. The latter used Cooch Behar as a base for what would prove to be a disastrous expedition to Assam. During the two years of the occupation, the name of  the town of Cooch Behar was changed to Alamgirnagar and coins were struck in the name of Aurangzeb. This coin has the regnal
year 4 of Aurangzeb in the bottom line of the reverse. These half rupees are very rare. It should be noted that, two or three decades ago, rupee-size coins of similar type appeared on the market. These were modern fakes. The legends of the present coin read: Obv.: *Aora/ngajeva V* ā */dasaha Ala/mgira *Rev.: *Jarava/ Alamgi/rnagara/ Sana 4*

*Cooch Behar: quarter rupee of Dharendra or Harendra Narayan *

There are only three quarter tankas/rupees in the Rhodes Cooch Behar collection and this one is not in RB, published in 1999. Because of the way the legends were engraved on the dies, it is never possible to distinguish between the issues of Dharendra and Harendra Narayan.

# ** ** **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 214** Page

ONS news - Seventh century Syria numismatic round table 2013 New members, lists received New and recent publications

The 'year 20'mint revisited, by W. Oddy & S. Mansfield

On some coins published by Dr Shinji Hirano, by M. Fedorov

About some unknown dinars of Fa'iq al-Hass, general and governor under the Samanids, by V. Kalinin

Four remarkable Iranian copper coins, by A. Akopyan & F. Mosanef

Rendering the name of Heraclius II (numismatic evidence), by G. Gabashvili

Ways and by-ways of Indian numismatics: apsects of money circulation in the Bengal and Madras Presidencies, by - Herrli

The circulation of tin in Palembang (Sumatra): its monetary and non-monetary functions: tin and lead ingots, animals and talismans, by M. Mitchiner

Some silver coins of the Safavid ruler, Isma'il II,

Auction news: David Fore collection; Nicholas Rhodes collection

*Printed by Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, UK.     *