# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

# NEWSLETTER

# No. 155

## Winter 1998

## ONS News

**From the Editor** Communication by e-mail is nowadays a speedy and inexpensive way of making and maintaining contact. It would be useful to compile a directory of e-mail addresses of all those ONS members who have access to this facility. This could then be published in a future newsletter and incorporated into a future edition of the membership directory. I would therefore like to invite all members with an e-mail address and who would like to have that address made available to other ONS members to send me details of that address by e-mail to sgoron@msn.com

**ONS - Annual General Meeting** The Annual General Meeting of the ONS will take place on **Saturday 6 June 1998, commencing 14.00** at the Cumberland Hotel, Marble Arch, London, in a room adjacent to the coin fair that will be taking place, to transact the following business: to receive a report from the Council on the Society's activities during the year;
to receive and consider the Society's accounts to vote on the adoption by the Society of the constitution in the form set out in the Society's Newsletter number 155.

By order of the Council Peter Smith, Secretary It is important that as many members as possible attend this meeting. The Annual General Meeting will be followed at 15.00 by a number of interesting talks. These are due to be given by Dr. Venetia Porter (Islamic subject), Joe Cribb (South East Asia), Helen Wang (China) and Amiteshwar Jha (India). So there should be something of interest for everyone.

**Constitution** *Following comments from some members, the draft constitution* *published in Newsletter 154 has been amended in some places. The* *revised version is set out below. There have been changes to* *paragraphs 3, 4, 5,* **7** *and 9. Included with this newsletter is a* *voting paper for you to indicate your approval or otherwise of the* *proposed constitution. Your Council has devoted a fair amount of* *time to devising this constitution and we hope that you will feel* *able to give it your approval.* ***Please ensure that you return your*** ***voting paper to the interim Secretary of the Society, Peter Smith,*** ***9 Grandison Road, London SWll 6LS, UK, as soon as possible*** ***after you have received it.***

**Oriental Numismatic Society** Rules adopted on

**I. Constitution.** The name of the Society is the Oriental Numismatic Society (the 'Society'). The Society is a private society founded in 1970 by Michael Broome. **2.Aims** The aims of the Society are:

(a) to promote the collection and study of Oriental coins, medals, paper money and related material;

(b) to encourage contacts and co-operation between those collecting and studying such coins and material;

(c) to publish a regular newsletter and other publications; (d) to organise meetings of its members; and (e) to do such other things as shall be conducive to the attainment of the above aims. **3. Membership** Any person (whether an individual, institution or corporation) wishing to become a member of the Society must apply in writing, agree to be bound by these rules and pay the entry fee (if any). Election to the Society is at the discretion of the Council, who may delegate this discretion to the appropriate Regional Secretary. Any entry fee shall be decided from time to time by the Council. A member may resign membership by written notice to the appropriate Regional Secretary. The Council may withdraw membership from any person if, in the Council's opinion, it is in the Society's interest to do so.

Members are required to permit the publication of their names, numismatic interests and addresses for correspondence and to permit such information to be stored on computer or by other electronic means. The membership list is intended to provide the initial means of contact between members with common interest so that knowledge can be shared. Copyright in the membership list belongs to the Society. Except with the Council's prior approval, the membership list may not be used for any other purpose other than members writing to other members or contacting other members to arrange meetings, study groups, or promote any other activity which is within the aims of the Society. **4. Annual subscriptions** Members (other than honorary members) shall pay an annual subscription on joining and annually thereafter on I January. Subscriptions are fixed by the Council and paid to the appropriate Regional Secretary. The council has the right to determine different rates of subscription for different regions. Failure to pay the annual subscription will entitle the Council or relevant Regional Secretary to lapse membership of that member. A person whose membership has lapsed for not having paid the subscription may (at the Regional Secretary's discretion) be asked to pay the entry fee on re-joining. Payment of the subscription will entitle members to the Society's publications issued in that year, with the exception of any special publications for which a charge is made. The Council has the right to waive the subscription of any member in recognition of exceptional service to the Society. - **Honorary members** The Council may elect any person as an honorary member of the Society in recognition of their contribution to Oriental numismatics or exceptional service to the Society. **An** honorary member shall be
entitled to all privileges of membership but shall not be obliged to pay the annual subscription 6. Council  The affairs of the Society shall be managed by a Council consisting of the following officers a Secretary General, a Deputy SecretaryGeneral, a Treasurer, a Secretary, a Newsletter Editor, a Membership Secretary, a Publications Secretary, Regional Secretaries, and not more than three other members of the Society

All officers and other members of the Council (other than Regional Secretaries) shall be elected at Annual General Meetings as described below At the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting held in 1999 and every third Annual General Meeting thereafter every member of the Council (other than Regional Secretaries) shall retire from the Council but shall be eligible for re-election Any casual vacancy occurring by resignation, or otherwise may be filled by the Council

A member of the Council may hold more than one office but shall have only one vote at Council meetings Decisions of the Council shall be by a simple majority and in the event of equality of votes the chairman ol the meeting shall have a casting vote The Council may co-opt members of the Society as non-voting Council members to perform tasks which cannot be performed by existing members of the Council

Council meetings shall be held two or more times a year and may be called by the Secretary General, his or her deputy or the Secretary The quorum for Council meetings shall be four members The Council may appoint sub-committees from among their number and delegate to them such of their powers and duties as the Council may determine

The members of the Council shall be entitled to be indemnified out of the assets of the Society against all expenses and liabilities properly incurred by them in the management of the affairs of the Society Expenses may only be incurred with the Council's prior approval 7. Regional Secretaries  The Council will define the regions covered by the Regional Secretaries and appoint and replace Regional Secretaries Members in each region may decide on the system in that Region for recommending to the Council the person for appointment as Secretary for their Region

The Regional Secretaries will collect entry fees and subscriptions from members in their regions and organise all other regional activities as appropriate They will also distribute the Society's publications in their region as soon as possible after receipt of them and transmit to the Treasurer all fees, subscriptions, and payments for publications less the costs of distributing the publications and necessary expenses whenever requested They will also provide the Treasurer with a statement of accounts and other financial information requested in time for preparation and audit of accounts before the Annual General Meeting 8. Officers  The officers of the Society shall be the Secretary General, Deputy Secretary General, Treasurer, Secretary, Newsletter Editor, Membership Secretary, Publication Secretary and Regional Secretaries The same individual may hold more than one office The Secretary General or, in his or her absence, the Deputy Secretary-General will chair council meetings and normally represent the Society in relation to other institutions and societies The Secretary will take minutes of and organise venues, agendas and notices for Council and General Meetings

The Treasurer will co-ordinate the finances of the Society in conjunction with the Regional Secretaries

The Membership Secretary will keep records of the members of the Society and their addresses and interests

The Newsletter Editor and Publication secretary will coordinate the publication programme 9. General meetings  An Annual General Meeting shall be held each year at a time and place decided by the Council, to transact the following business
to receive the Council's report on the activities of the Society during the previous year,
to receive and consider the accounts of the Society for the previous year, and
to decide on any resolution submitted in accordance with these
rules In 1999 and every third year thereafter the Meeting will also elect the members of the Council who stand for election or re-election A member may appoint any other member as his proxy to attend and vote on his behalf on a poll if a poll is directed to be taken by the Chairman of the meeting The Council will arrange for proxy forms to be sent to all members for use at General Meetings Proxy forms must be in such form as the Council may approve and returned to such address as the Council shall specify not less than 48 hours before the meeting at which it is to be used

Nominations for election of Council members (other than Regional Secretaries) must be in writing, supported by two other members, and sent to the Secretary in time for inclusion in the agenda and notice of meeting Persons nominated must agree in writing to act if elected Any other item to be included in the agenda and notice of meeting must, unless approved by the Council, be seconded by six other members

A Special General Meeting may be called by the Council or at the written request of not less than twenty members

Notice of General Meetings will be sent to all members at his or her last known address with details of the business to be transacted at least twenty-one days before the meeting The accidental omission to send notice to any member shall not invalidate proceedings at a meeting The quorum shall be fifteen members If after one hour a quorum is not present the meeting may transact any business necessary for the continuance of the Society including the election of the Council The Secretary General, or in his or her absence, a member of the Council shall take the chair Each member present shall have one vote Resolutions shall except where otherwise provided in these rules, be passed by a simple majority In the event of an equality of votes the chairman shall have a casting vote 10. Alterations of rules and byelaws  These rules may be altered at a General Meeting provided the resolution is passed by a majority of at least two-thirds of the members present in person or represented by proxy The Council shall have power to make, repeal, and amend such byelaws, as they may from time to time think necessary or desirable in the interests of the Society Byelaws, repeals and amendments shall have effect until set aside by the Council or General Meeting

11. Property  All cash payable to the Society shall be paid into an account or accounts in the name of the Society or in accordance with such arrangements as the Council may approve Any other property of the Society shall be held by not more than four Council members or other custodians appointed by the Council They shall deal with such property as directed by the Council for the furtherance of the Society's aims and for the expenses of its administration 12. Dissolution.  A resolution to dissolve the Society shall only be passed at a General Meeting provided the resolution is passed by at least twothirds of the members present and voting The dissolution shall take effect from the date of the resolution and the members of the Council shall be responsible for the winding up of the assets and liabilities of the Society Any surplus assets shall be given to a charity or chanties nominated by the Council

13. General.  Any question of copyright in the Society's publications shall be a matter to be decided between the contributor and the Council or Newsletter Editor or Publications Secretary

No member shall use the name of the Society for the purposes of trade or profit

A copy of these rules which shall be governed by English law shall be given to every person on becoming a member

Notices shall be deemed to have been served 48 hours after posting to the last address recorded by the Membership Secretary or relevant Regional Secretary

London Meeting The meeting mentioned in the previous newsletter duly took place on Saturday 7 March at the Coin and Medal Department of the British Museum with over 20 members present A variety of short talks were given on such series as the Kakwahids, Kushans, Patna
Post tokens and several unusual coins. Another meeting is planned for October, date yet to be determined.

**Seventh Century Syria Numismatic Round Table** The next meeting in this series, held in collaboration with the ONS, will take place at the Department of Coins and Medals, The British Museum, on Saturday 25 April, commencing 10.00. Papers are invited. These should be no longer than 30 minutes, while 5 minute presentations of new material are also welcome. The meetings originally focused on the so-called Arab-Byzantine coinage but have since then broadened to include the transition from classical to Islamic coinage, its prelude and aftermath. Of particular interest, therefore, are papers on the social, economic and cultural background which shed light on issuing authorities, iconography and the function of currency. For further information please contact Marcus and Susan Phillips, PO Box 348, Biggleswade, Beds., SG 18 SEQ, UK.

**Indian Coinage Study Day In Cambridge, UK** The Fitzwilliam Museum in collaboration with the ONS are planning to hold a one-day symposium on the Mughals and their contemporaries on **Saturday 13 June 1998.** Speakers are due to include Sanjay Garg, Ken Wiggins, your editor and others including, it is hoped, one or more historians. Offers of additional papers or short communications would be welcome. Anyone interested in receiving a copy of the programme or who wishes to register, please contact Mark Blackburn, Department of Coins & Medals, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge CB2 I RB (Tel: 0 1223 332917; e-mail: mablOO l@cam.ac.uk ) There will not be a fee to participate in the symposium, but numbers may be limited.

**Oriental Initiatives at the Fitzwilliam Museum** The Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge has a general collection of some 21,000 Oriental coins, including c. 13,000 Indian, 1,000 pre­ Islamic Iranian, 3,500 Near Eastern and Central Asian Islamic, and 3,500 Far Eastern coins. The collection has mainly been formed since the mid-nineteenth century, through purchase, gifts and bequests from Edward Thomas, the India Office (Masson collection), J. D. Tremlett, R. B. Whitehead, A. W. Botham, Philip Grierson, and others. It also includes a number of College collections on long-term loan. For some forty years before Indian Independence the Fitzwilliam, like the British Museum, was on the official distribution list for Indian treasure trove. Unfortunately there is no orientalist on the Coin Room staff, but arrangements have recently been made to draw upon the expertise of colleagues from elsewhere to organise, expand and publish parts of the collection.

For three successive years Dr Vlastimil Novak of the National Museum, Prague, has spent two months each summer working at the Fitzwilliam on the Islamic collection, supported by generous grants from **Mr** Samir Shamma and the Skilliter Centre for Ottoman Studies. He has been reorganising the collection and preparing a catalogue in Sylloge format which we hope will be published in 2000. The Islamic collection is comparatively small and patchy in its representation - with strengths in some series but wholly lacking in others. In recent years we have acquired several hundred coins through donation or purchase to help fill some of the obvious gaps. More contributions would be very welcome, and if any collectors have say duplicates they could donate, we would be very grateful.

For the Indian collection we have established a programme to bring an Indian scholar to Cambridge for three months each year for the next six years to study a particular series. This has been generously funded for the first three years by the Charles Wallace India Trust. The first visitors will be Sanjay Garg, of the National Archives in Delhi and his wife, Nurussaba, who will work on the coinages of the Mughals and their contemporaries. We hope that as a result the collection will not only be better organised, but that it can also be published in a series of sylloge style catalogues to make it more accessible to students and collectors. We also intend to use the project as the focus for organising some ONS Study Days, the first of which is planned for June 1998 (see details above).

Any enquiries about the collection should be addressed to Mark Blackburn, Keeper of Coins & Medals, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge CB2 I RB.

**News from Tübingen** Just a reminder that the next ONS meeting in Tübingen will take place on 18 and 19 April 1998. All members interested in Islamic numismatics are invited to participate and contribute papers. For further information please contact... Another event due to take place in Tübingen from 30 March to I April this year is a symposium entitled *Bergbau, Ede/metal!* *Handel und Munzpragung (Mining, Trade in Precious Metals and* *Minting).* The seminar will be in five sections: mining; analytical methods; silver stock and circulation; interpretation of metallurgical coin analysis; precious metal trade and mint supply. Should members receive this newsletter in time, additional information can be obtained from Lutz Ilisch (address a ¢ove).

**News from the Pakistan Chapter** The Pakistan Chapter of the ONS remained quite active in terms of meetings and other activities for the promotion of interest in numismatics during 1997. Besides a number of meetings that were held between the local members, we had the pleasure of receiving Bob Senior during December. His discourses with different members were a source of valuable information for them, particularly his knowledge about the Indo-Scythians. **f**

Members of the Pakistan Chapter with Bob Senior

A hoard of Samanid gold coins was discovered in Heart during the year. The hoard consisted of over JOO coins, all gold dinars of different Samanid rulers up to Nuh II bin Mansur, 976 to 996 AD. Two of the succeeding kings of this dynasty ruled for only three years after which they were dispossessed by Mahmud of Ghazna in 999 AD. It can therefore be inferred that the hoard was probably buried around the time of Mahmud's invasion. Some of the coins were in excellent condition.

A hoard of silver coins of the Shahis of Kabul was discovered during August 1997 in the city of Multan from a graveyard while a fresh grave was being dug. The coins were hidden in a sealed copper urn. The contents numbered in excess of 1000 coins, most of which were lost to individuals, while 260 coins were recovered by police and handed over to Archaeological Department authorities. These will probably be kept at the Lahore Museum as there is no such facility in Multan. The coins all carried the *Samanta Deva* legend and it appears that these were buried prior to the Muslim conquest of Multan, which took place in 708 AD, because no Islamic coin was found with them. **Members News**

Having received and perused...Information Sheet on Chinese chops, UK member David Hartill comments that the listing makes no mention of chops on copper coins. He adds that he has some Xian Feng 50s and 20s coins of Fujian province (c. 1854) which have been quite extensively chopped with Chinese characters - one specimen having no fewer than 11 chops on the obverse. He asks whether any other member has other such copper coins with chops.

In Newsletter I 50 we celebrated... birthday; we are delighted to learn that Ken has recently been the recipient of two awards. He has been named Life Member of the
Hellenic Numismatic Society, been presented with a medal and diploma to mark that award as well as having volume 15 of *Nomismatika Khronika ( 1996)* dedicated to him. In addition, he has also become the first recipient of the American Numismatic Society's Distinguished Volunteer Award.... is interested in any information on the small copper coinage of late Cheras (15th century) and early Travancore (up to 1820). She is particularly interested in the chronology of the various issues, where they were minted and whether the various designs had any meaning (beyond being linked to Vishnu and other deities). Any member able to assist is asked to write to her enclosing sketches, photographs or photocopies.

**Auction News** Dates for forthcoming Baldwins auctions are as follows:

Tuesday and Wednesday 5 and 6 May 1998, London Thursday 3 September 1998, Singapore (Taisei-Baldwin­ Gillio)

Monday and Tuesday 12 and 13 October 1998, London Thursday 4 March 1999, Singapore (Taisei-Baldwin-Gillio) All the above auctions are likely to include material of oriental interest. Dates may change. For further information please contact Charles Riley, Tel: ++44 171 930 9808; fax: ++44 171 930 9450.

Spink Coin Auction dates for 1998 are as follows:

Monday 22 June, Singapore, with a strong section of Far Eastern banknotes.

Tuesday 14 July, London, with a selection of Islamic coins and a collection of coins from Tibet and Nepal. Tuesday and Wednesday 6 and 7 October, London, including Islamic coins.

Tuesday and Wednesday 17 and 18 November, London, including Islamic coins.

Tuesday 24 November, Hong Kong, with Far East coins and banknotes. Some dates may be subject to change. For further details and catalogues (£10 each) please contact Julie Franklin in the Coin Department: Tel: ++44 171 747 6864; fax: ++44 171 839 5214.

## Other News

**The Kohler-Osbahr Collection in the Kultur-** ** ** **und Stadt­** **historisches Museum, Duisburg** **By Ralf Althoff** The Kohler-Osbahr Collection was formed by Dr. Herbert W. Kohler and his wife Ingeborg Kohler, nee Osbahr. Dr. Kohler professionally held a high managerial post in Wirtschafts­ vereinigung Eisen und Stahl in Dusseldorf and is a prominent social and political personality in the city of Duisburg. Dr. and Mrs. Kohler have been collecting antiquities and coins for the last 40 years.

The Kohler-Osbahr Collection forms the scientific part of the Stiftung Kohler-Osbahr fUr Musik und Wissenschaft (Kohler­ Osbahr Foundation for Music and Science), founded in 1987.

In 1990 the collection was deposited in the Kultur- und Stadthistorisches Museum Duisburg. The collection will be looked after by a numismatist (at present, Ralf Althoff M.A.) and will be exhibited in a permanent Gallery.

The Kohler-Osbahr Collection consists of nearly 70.000 coins and approximately 500 antique objects. It is, therefore, one of the larger collections of coins in North Rhine-Westphalia. The 70.000 coins include: - more than 500 pieces of primitive money
- 14 000 Chinese, Korean and Japanese coins  - 2200 Siamese Porcelain Tokens  - 6000 Indian coins  - 3500 Greek coins  - 4000 Southeast Asian coins  - 2200 Roman coins,  - 2000 Islamic coins  - 3500 Byzantine coins  - 2000 American coins  and 15 000 European coins and other miscellaneous pieces

The permanent exhibition in the museum displays only a very small part of the collection A catalogue was published in 1990, which presents a selection of the Kohler-Osbahr Collection including various objects of art, small sculptures and jewellery of the whole world Because of the large number of coins, it is not possible to display them all at once

In an attempt to overcome this difficulty and to make the coins in the Kohler-Osbahr Collection more accessible to numismatists. It was decided to publish inventory catalogues of the collection The details of these catalogues published so far are as follows

**Ralf Althoff (Bearb.),** ***Sammlung Kohler-Osbahr, Bd. II/l*** ***Vormunzliche Zahlungsmittel und aufiergewohnliche*** ***Geld-*** ***formen aus China, Aitnam, Korea und Japan.***

Stadt Duisburg, Kultur- und Stadthistorisches Museum (Hrsg ), Duisburg 1993 ISBN 3-89279-990-3 Price DM25

This 214 page catalogue presents a lot of odd and curious money mainly from China Cowrie shells, ant-coins, ghost-face money, bells, spade money, knife money, tally-sticks, bean-cake money and others are described exactly and shown with black and white photos at the scale of 1 1 Some pieces are also shown in colour on the covers and plates A foreword as well as a short introduction provides some general information An index of Chinese transcriptions to all the objects is located at the end of this catalogue

**Bernhard Weber-Brosamer (Bearb.),** ***Sammlung*** ***Kohler-*** ***Osbahr,*** ***Bd.*** ***II/2.*** ***Vormunzliche*** ***Zahlungsmittel*** ***und*** ***aufiergewohnliche Geldformen aus Sudostasien, Afrika und*** ***anderen Teilen der Welt.***

Stadt Duisburg, Kultur- und Stadthistorisches Museum (Hrsg ), Duisburg 1993 ISBN 3-89279-995 4 Price DM25

This 150 page catalogue describes 314 pieces of primitive and curious money from Southeast Asia, Africa and other parts of the world All objects are shown in the same way as in Vol II/l Main subjects are the silver currencies from the Indo-Chinese Peninsula between 13th to 19th century AD, especially the silver ingots of Siam, Laos and Burma and the famous "bullet coins" of Siam In addition there are short texts to provide some cultural and political background to the particular objects

**Ralf Althoff (Bearb.),** ***Sammlung Kohler-Osbahr, Bd. II/3*** ***Vormunzliche*** ***Zahlungsmittel*** ***und*** ***aufiergewohnliche*** ***Geldformen.*** ***Siamesische Porzellantoken.*** Stadt Duisburg, Kultur- und Stadthistorisches Museum (Hrsg ), Duisburg 1995 ISBN 3-89279-513-4 Price DM118

This volume is the last catalogue in the series of *Primitive* *Currency and Extraordinary Kind of Money* and is written in German and English including the translation of all inscriptions of the tokens The 331 page book, with 54 colour plates, includes a lot of information, descriptions of all the pieces, translations of all the inscriptions and 1359 pictures of the pieces in colour All tokens are shown at a scale of 1 1 Including duplicate specimens, the collection contains more than 2200 tokens, mainly in porcelain, but also in metal, glass, clay and mother of pearl

This catalogue is the most extensive work on the subject after H A Ramsden's publication *Siamese Porcelain and Other Tokens,* Yokohama 1911

**Ralf Althoff (Bearb.),** ***Sammlung Kohler-Osbahr, Bd IV.*** ***Komische*** ***Munzen.*** Stadt Duisburg, Kultur- und Stadthistorisches Museum (Hrsg), Duisburg 1997 ISBN 3-82279-529-0 Price DM38

This IS the latest catalogue in the series to be published Vol **III** *Griechische Munzen und ihr Umfeld* will be published later

The 246 page catalogue contains exact descriptions of 2147 roman coins, some *Paduaner* imitations and other material
concerning forgeries More than 1250 pieces are shown on the coloured cover and in black and white plates A foreword as well as a short introduction giving general information is included

The next project we are working on involves more than 3500 coins of Byzantium and surrounding states The first part of this next catalogue (Vol V, 1 Anastasius I 491-518 to Phocas 602-610) will be published in the beginning of 1998 The book will contain 240 pages with exact descriptions of 1198 Byzantine coins and some pieces issued by the Vandals and Ostrogoths We intend to depict approximately 800 pieces in coloured and black and white pictures on 60 plates

It IS further intended to publish all the 70,000 coins of the Kohler-Osbahr Collection in this manner After the Byzantine coins, we intend to deal with the Greek coins and then the Indian coins As the collection is extensively representative in numismatic material from around the world, it is difficult for a single numismatist to work upon the collection as a whole We are therefore keen to invite specialist numismatists to participate in the publication-programme Recently, for example, we were pleased to have the assistance of Mr Shailendra Bhandare, a numismatist from Bombay, to work on the Indian Coins

Any member who would like to visit the collection or find out more about it, is welcome to contact Ralf Althoff at the museum

**News from Spink and Son Ltd, London** The Coin Department of this well-known firm, together with their Islamic and Indian Arts Department, will be displaying a small selection of Islamic coins from their large and varied stock, and a representative example of Mughal coins from an important collection that is for sale The exhibition will be held from 27 April to 15 May 1998, on the ground floor of Spink (King Street, St James's)

The Khusru collection of Mughal coins consists of 540 gold and about 250 silver coins, from the reign of Babur to that ot Shah Alam II, and may be viewed by appointment Also on display will be items of ceramic and metal work and manuscripts depicting calligraphic styles For further information, please contact Julie Franklin in the Coin Department on -i-i-44 (0)171 747 6864

**Nasik Seminar** The Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies, Nasik, is planning a seminar on the subject *Mediaeval Indian Coinages a* *Historical and Economic Perspective* for 8-10 January 1999 **The** aim of the seminar is to shift the emphasis from the mere reporting of finds and the publication of new coin types to studies on coins which make use of contemporary literary and other historical sources The seminar will focus particularly on the Indian Sultanates but will also embrace the issues of the non-Muslim states of the time, such as Vijayanagar, Kangra etc Themes to be considered for papers are
coin hoards and finds and their context the circulation pattern of coins, trade routes minting activity, administration, technology and mint distribution
metallic content of coins, sources of metal metrology and exchange relationships the names and titles on coins coins and religion coin nomenclature camp mints and the movement of kings and princes the economy, coins and the currency system Any member interesting in attending the seminar and / or contributing a paper should contact the Institute as soon as possible for additional information The address is Indian Institute for Research in Numismatic Studies, PO Anjanen, dist Nasik 422 213, Maharashtra, India

**Leiden Exhibition** A new exhibition at the Royal Coin Cabinet, Leiden, Netherlands IS entitled *Moneta Exotica* and will be on display until 30 August 1998 The display, prepared by Mr PC J F van Erve of the National Bank, gives an overview of a wide range of early and traditional currency forms used by people all over the world before the introduction of the present metal and paper currency media
Asia and Africa are the dominant sources for the exhibition, which is accompanied by a small, but attractive, booklet in Dutch *Moneta* *Exotica, oorspronkelijk* *geld uit de hele* *world,* price Dfl 25 from the Museum of Antiquities, Leiden

**Obituaries** It IS with regret that we report the death of **Mr H J Kagerer.** Mr Kagerer worked at the German Embassy in Bern and was a collector of Indian coins Our condolences go to his family

We also regret to report the death on 8 December 1997, at the age of **78,** of **Prof.** **Robert Gobi** While not a member of the ONS, Prof Gobi was a prolific author on a wide range of numismatic subjects that embraced Sasanian, Kushano-Sasanian, Kushan, Hephthalite, Celtic, Roman and Byzantine coinages Born in Vienna in 1919, the son of an Austrian postal inspector, he studied classical archaeology after the Second World War and entered the academic community From an early age he had shown an interest in ancient coinage and his dissertation, about the coinage of Roman emperors Valerian and Galhenus, was published in * * *Numismatische* *Zeitschrift,* *1951 53,* and was later reprinted as a book He subsequently applied a similar approach to his studies of Sasanian coinage

**Prof.** **Gobi: select bibliography** (articles etc on oriental themes)

Sasanidischc Munzstudien I Generelle Vomotizen MONG 7,!12ff Sasanidische Munzstudien II Romische und sasanidische Bustengruppen MONG 7, 133ff

Sasanidische Munzstudien III Die Kronenfolge des Sasaniden Artaxer I MONG 7, 138ff

Die InvesUtut des Djamasp SM3, 57f Stand und Aufgaben der sasanidischen Numismatik La Nouvelle Clio 3, 380ff

Die Munzpragung des Sasanidenreiches Vox Orientis 3 (Marz), 2f Die sasanidische Zwischenkrone und ihr Problemkonnex Vox Orientis 3 (September), 2f

| Aufbau der Munzpragung (des Sdsanidenstaates), in F Altheim - R | Steihl, Ein asiatischer Staat Wiesbaden, 5 Iff |
|:--- |:--- |
| Der Herrscher-Erloser in spatsasanidischem Gewand Palaeologia 3, | 95ff |
| Neue Zuteilungen zur Munzpragung der Chioniten (Material und | Struktur) Palaeologia 4 (Kostrzewski Number, Osaka), 274ff |

Der Herrscher-Erloser in spatsasanidischem Gewand Palaeologia 3, 95ff

Neue Zuteilungen zur Munzpragung der Chioniten (Material und Struktur) Palaeologia 4 (Kostrzewski Number, Osaka), 274ff

Neufunde sasanidischer Reichsmunzcn WZKM 53 23ff

Die Munzpragung der Ku'on von Vima Kadphises bis Bahram IV in F Altheim - R Stiehl, Finanzgeschichte der Spatantike Frankfurt Mam, 173ff

Forschungsbencht zur anUken Numismatik Mittelasiens NZ77, 18ff Die Munzen der Kuschan (Vortragsauszug), MONG 10, 8f

Munzpragung und Außenpolitik des Sasanidenstaates unter Sapor II Akten des 24 Internationalen Orientalistenkongresses München Wiesbaden, 515ff

Zu einigen Falschungen vorislamischer orientalischer Munzen MONG 11, Iff

Zwei moderne Falschungen I Ein angebliches Dekadrachmon des Vima Kadphises-Kaniska 2 Das sogenannte Silbermedaillon Bahrams III, in F Altheim, Geschichte der Hunnen I Berlin, Beilage 2, (=380ff)

Pasiz und das sasanidische Kupfer, in F Altheim, Geschichte der Hunnen I Berlin, Beilage 3, (=388ff)

Narsê und nicht Bahram III Das Problem des Herrschers mit der Lamellenkrone Zugleich em Beitrag zur fruhsasanidischen Munzepigraphik NZ 78, 5ff

Zur hephthalitischen Munzkunde und ihren mittelasiatischen Zusammenhangen, MONG 11, 49ff

Zwei Pragungen arabischer Gouverneure in Iran SM 11, 5f Investitur im sasanidischen Iran und ihre numismatische Bezeugung, Zugleich em Beitrag zur Ikonographie der Gottin Anahit WZKM 56 (Festschrift Herbert W Duda), 36ff

Monnaies sassanides de Suse MDAFA 37, 4Iff Zwei Neufunde in der Numismatik der Kuschan I Die erste, griechische. Emission des Kanischka 2 Die Pallas (Minerva) auf den Kuschandinaren und die falschlich so genannte "Roma" MONG 11, 94ff

Divus Vima Kadphises In H Humbach, Die Kaniska-Inschrift von Surkh-Kotal Wiesbaden (Anhang l=57ff)

Technische Notizen zur sasanidischen Munzpragung MONG 12, 29ff GrundnB einer historischen Palaographie der Kusanmunzen Erstellt auf der Basis der Goldpragung von Vima Kadphises bis zum Ausgang der kusano-sasanidischen Herrsher Iranica Antica I, 93ff

Zur "Beweinungsszene" aus Pendzikent II Die Krone des "Beweinten"- Eine Paraphrase der Krone des Sasaniden Bahram IV CAJ 6, 267ff

Bericht uber die numismatischen Forschungen auf dem Gebiet der Sasaniden, Kusan, Hephthaliten und Kidanten Congresso Intemazionale di Numismatica (Roma, 11-16 Settembre 1961), Vol I, Relazioni, 193ff

Die sasanidische Krone Alte und Moderne Kunst, 7 Jahrg Die Munzen der Sasaniden im Koniglichen Munzkabinett Haag 's Gravenhage

Die Kusan und ihre Umwelt in numismatischer Sicht (Vortrag am XV Deutschen Onentahstentag GotUngen 1961) ZDMG lll,480ff

| Die Munzpragung des Sasanidenstaates Stand der Forschungen und | Auswertungsmoglichkeiten (Vortrag am XV Deutschen Onentahstentag | Gottingen 1961) ZDMG 111, 4l2ff |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Von Wesen und Wirking der sasanidischen Krone MONG 12, 96ff | Report on mission as Field expert numismatist at the National Museum | at Kabul, Afghanistan UNESCO/PP/AFG/CUA/7 |
| Beitrage zur Ikonographie der Kusankonige Huviska CAJ 8, 135ff | Geschichte Afghanistans zwischen Alexander und Mohammed BOstan | 3, 26ff |

Von Wesen und Wirking der sasanidischen Krone MONG 12, 96ff Report on mission as Field expert numismatist at the National Museum at **Kabul,** Afghanistan UNESCO/PP/AFG/CUA/7

Beitrage zur Ikonographie der Kusankonige Huviska CAJ 8, 135ff Geschichte Afghanistans zwischen Alexander und Mohammed BOstan 3, 26ff

Der mehrfache Munzbildrand und die numismatischen Beziehungen zwischen Byzanz und dem Sasanidenrejch Jahrb der Osterr ByzanUnischen Gesellschaft 13, 193ff

Sammlungen orientalischer Munzen in Osterreich Biistan 4/63-1/64, 83f

Die sasanidischen Tonbullen vom Takht-i Suleiman (Iran) OAWphilhistKlA 10l,49ff

Zwei neue Termini fur ein zentrales Datum der Alten Geschichte Mittelasiens, das Jahr 1 des Kusankonigs Kaniska (Vortrag i d Sitzung der philhistKI am 21 Oktober 1964) OAWphilhistKlA 101, I37ff

Gem m A H Dam und H Humbach Tochi Valley Inscriptions in the Peshawar Museum Ancient Pakistan I, 125ff

Die Beziehungen zwischen den Munzgruppen der sogenannten kusanosasamdischen Serie, der Kidanten und der fruhen Hephthaliten Congresse internazionale di Numismatica (Roma 1961), Atti 469ff

Die drei Versionen der Kaniska-Inschrift von Surkh Kotal Neuedition der Texte auf verbesserter technisch epigraphischer und palaolographischer Basis OAWphilhistKlD 88 Bd

Zur Pflege der orientalischen Numismatik m Osterreich Bericht uber den 8 Osten- Historikertag, St Polten 15-18 Sept 1964, 192ff

Vasiska II, em bisher unbekannter Konig der spateren Kusan OAWphilhistKlA 102, 283ff

Eine neuerworbene Sammlung mittelasiatischer Munzen Jahrb des Beraischen Historischen Museums 45/46, 185ff (erschienen 1968')

Dokumente Zur Geschichte der Iramschen Hunnen in Baktrien und Indien 4 Bde Wiesbaden

Geschichte des vorislamischen Mittelasiens in Forschung und Lehre Gmndsatzliches und das Wiener Programm WZKSO XI, Iff

Die numismatischen Forschungen auf dem Gebiet der Sasaniden, Kusan und Iramschen Hunnen A Survey of Numismatic Research I960 1965 II Medieval and Oriental Numismatics, Kopenhagen, 267ff

Der Bericht des Religionsstifters Mam uber due Munzherstellung Versuch einer Analyse OAWphilhistKlA 104, 113ff

Sasanidische Numismatik (Handbucher d mittelasiatischen Numismatik I), Braunschweig (engi Ubersetzung siehe 1971)

Numismatic evidence relating to the date of Kaniska Papers on the date of Kaniska (Conference in the date of Kaniska, London 20-22 April --- 1960. Lalden, 103ff

Zum Chronologieproblem der sasanidischen Kunst Forschungen zur Kunst Asiens In memonam Kurt Erdmann, Istanbul, 2';ff

Der kuanische Goldmunzschatz von Debra Damo (Athiopien) 1940 CAJ 14, 24Iff

Die sasanidischen Tonbullen vom Takht i Suleiman und die Probleme der sasanidischen Sphragistik A AH 19, 9'5ff

Die Munzpragung Irans im Altertum Bustan 470-1/71, 20ff Neue Ergebnisse zur absoluten Chronologie im antiken Mittelasien und ihre Folgen OAWphilhistKlA 108, 4If Sasanian Numismatics (Engl Ausgabe, s o 1968)

Spiegel der T'ang-Zeit mit sasanidischem Randdekor Ex orbe religionum Studia Geo Widengren oblata 2, 80ff

Beitrage zur Ikonographie der KuSnkonige 11 Eine weitere Medaillonapplike von Huviska CAJ 16, 187ff

A New Type Sasanian Dinar of Vahran V (420 438) SAN 3 59

Der sasanidische Siegelkanon (Handbucher der mittelasiatischen Numismatik IV), Braunschweig

Sasaniden, Kusan und Iranische Hunnen A Survey of Numismatic Research 1966-1971 11 Medieval and Oriental Numismatics, New York 347ff

Der Triumph des Ssanidcn Sahpuhr 1 uber drei romische Kaiser Vortragsauszug 14 12 1973 OAWphilhistKlA 110, 367ff

Der Triumph des Sasaniden Sahpuhr 1 uber Gordian Philippus und Valenanus OAWphilhistKlD 116 Bd

Reitemomadismus und seBhafte Welt Der Einbruch dcr Hunnen in die spatantike Zivihsation OAWAlmanach 125, Iff

Der sasanidische Munzfund von Seleukia (Vëh Ardasër) Mesopotamia 8/9, 229ff

Die Tonbullen vom Takht e Suleiman Ein Beitrag zur spatsasanidischen Sphragistik Takht e Suleiman Ergebnisse der Ausgrabungen Bd 1 Berlin

The Roman-Kushanian Medallion in the British Museum JNSI 38, 21ff

Vasiska Vaskusana und Xodesah Weitere Neufunde ku sanischer Konigsnamen OAWphilhistKlA 116, Go 9

Iranisch hunnische Munzen, 1 Nachtrag Iranica Antiqua XVI, 173ff

Der veruntreute Himmel Die Gotterwelt des Kusanreiches LNVll, 79ff

Ikonographie und Epigraphik Ein Beitrag zur Methodenfrage in der sasanidischen Sphragistik LNV 11, 265ff

Sasanian Coins In The Cambridge History of Iran 3/1 (The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian Periods), 322ff Cambridge

Die Titel der ersten beiden Sasaniden auf ihren Munzen OAWphilhistKlA 120, 290ff

System und Chronologie der Munzpragung des Kusanreiches Sonderband der Veröffentlichungen der Numismatischen Kommission OAW Wien

Die Buddha-Darstellungen un dcr Munzpragung der Kusan Orientalia Josephi Tucci Memonae Dicata (Serie Orientali Roma) LVl, 2, 535ff

Risto - was sonsf Ein Beitrag zum Thema Rom und der Onent LNV 111, 169ff

Die kusanischen Bronze Appliken mit Konigdarstellungen LNV III, 193ff

MedaiUen des islamischen Mittelalters und ihr Formenkreis LNV HI, 265ff

Die Numismatik als Quelle zur Kunst der Sasaniden, der Kusan und dcr Iranischen Hunnen Bull of the Asia Institute 1, 65ff Detroit, MI

Sabuhr, Konig der Konige von Iran Quademi Ticinesi di numismatica e antichita classiche XXX, 239ff Lugano

DONUM BURNS Die Kisanmunzen im Munzkabinett Bern und die Chronologie Wien

(Gem m D Faccenna und M A Khan) A Report on the Recent Discovery of a Deposit of Coins in the Sacred Area of Butkara 1 (Swat, Pakistan), 95-114 Roma

**New and Recent Publications** *The American* *Journal* *of Numismatics,* 9 (1997) contains the following two Items of oriental interest Gerald M Browne 7Vie *Elephant-nder* *Dinaras of Kumaragupta I,* pp 37-40 Touraj Daryaee* The Use of Religio-political * *Propaganda* *on the* *Coinage ofXusro II,* pp 41-53

J and AG Elayi *Studies in Phoenician* *Weights* (Supplement nr 5 to *Transeuphratene),* Pans 1997 400 pages, 45 plates, price

590FF Published by Editions Gabalda, 18 rue Pierre et Mane Cune, F-75015 Pans, France Tel *++33* 1 4326 5355, fax -^-^-33 1 4325 0471 Presented in this book are 472 Phoenician weights dating from the 8th to the 3rd century BC, half of them hitherto unpublished This study has enlarged the epigraphical corpus with new inscriptions and added new motifs to the iconographic material It explains the techniques of fabrication, counterfeiting and weighing practices and reveals an important period in the history of balances before the invention of the steelyard Using statistical models the book establishes Phoenician metrology on a more reliable basis, a fact that will be useful for numismatic studies

K Ganesh and Dr Ginjapathy * * *The Coins of the* *Vijayanagar* *Empire,* (Bangalore 1997), card covers, 135 pp, illustrated throughout

K Ganesh and Dr Ginjapathy * * *The Coins of the* *Ho\\salas,* (Bangalore, 1998), card covers, 50 pp, illustrated throughout For further information on both these books, members can contact Mr Ganesh at 325 BEL Layout, I Block, Vidyaranyapura, Bangalore 560 003, India

Ed K K Maheshwari and Biswajeet Rath *Numismatic* *Panorama* *Essays in Honour of Late Sh SM* *Shukla,* (New Delhi, 1996), case-bound, 364 pp, illustrated throughout, price IRs 1200 ISBN81-86222-11-X This volume includes the following items Kalpana S Desai *On Indus Seal the Unicorn* Rehan Ahamad *Two* *Silver* *Punchmarked Coin Hoards* T R Hardaker *Punchmarked Coin Forgeries* Aruna Sharma *Relevance of Numismatic Approach to the Study of* *Mattiura* Amiteshwar Jha* More than one King Named Satavahana an Examination *Ajay Mitra Shastri* Mahakhatapa Vasithipula Isamahisa *P D Chumble* A Coin of Siva Satakarni *Michael Mitchiner* The Circulation of Satavahana Coins in Tamilnadu *PL Gupta* Kushana Silver Coins *B N Mukherjee* Islamic* *Forms of Siva on Kushana Coins* Manmohan Kumar *Ancient Mint at Rohtak* PV Radhakrishnan *Roman and Byzantine copper Coins* Dilip Rajgor *Abheraka the Earliest Western Kshatrapa* R C Senior *A New Western Kshatrapa Identified-'* VV Krishna Sastry *Kshatrapa Coin Hoard from Ghantasala* M Veerender *Ikshvaku Coins* K K Maheshwari & Biswajeet Rath *Fire altar Type Coins of Skandagupta* *Towards a Typological and* *Chronological* *Definition* G Kamalakar *Shri Ram Kashyap Gotrins* V Pandit Rao & B Naga Padma *Chemical Analysis and Metallographic* *Study of South Indian Gold Coins* M C Ganorkar* Tin as an element of Coinage *Dhiren Gala & Girish Vira* Unpublished Copper Coins of Early Mediaeval * *Gujerat* Al Sayyed & Nicholas Rhodes *A New Coin of Iltutmish* Danish Moin *Animal Motif on the Coins of Islam Shah a Note* Joe Cribb *Chinese Coin Finds from South India and Sri Lanka* JR Hunnargikar *Some Interesting Coins of Akbar* Jan Lingen *Some Observations on Jehangir s Ilahi Rupees from Agra* Sanjay Garg *Parodies on Mughal Coin Couplets* Aravind S Athavale *Coins of the Nizam Shahi Sultanate of Ahmednagar* Sajid Naim & Dilip P Balsekar *A New Holkar Coin* K W Wiggins *The Acquisition of Indian Mints by the English East India* *Company* SK Bose* Tea Garden Tokens of Assam *PJ Surana* Reminiscence of Palanpur Coins *

Dilip Rajgor *History of the Traikutakas* *(Based on Coins and* *Inscriptions),* (New Delhi, 1998), case-bound, 80 pages, 8 plates, ISBN 81-86622-5 Price IRs 280 It is hoped to review this work in a future newsletter

Volume 19, 1995 of the *Numismatic* *Digest,* published by the Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies, Nasik Casebound, 226 pp, illustrated, ISBN 81-86786-01-5 Price IRs 350 or $US 25 This volume included the following articles Devendra Handa *The Riddle of King Mahadeva* R R Bhagava *Numismatic Evidence ofMalhar* Duan W Roller *A Note im Greek* *Coins* *from Tamilnadu* RC Senior *The Posthumous Hermaeus Coinage and the Transition from* *the Indo-Greeks to the Indo-Scythians* Ajay Mitra Shastri* Jogalthambi Hoard of Nahapana s Coins Some * *A spec IS*

Vasant Choudhary *An Enigmatic Coin of Kachar* Sanjay Garg *Early Sultans of Delhi and the Caliphs* Syed Ejaz Hussain *Coins of Ala ud dm-Bibban Shah* SG Dhopate *A New Hoard of Mediaeval Copper Coins* K W Wiggins *A I Jinn Hoard from North Konkan* N G Rhodes *A New Kashmir Coin in the Name of Akbar*
Danish Moin & Dilip Balsekar *Rare Quarter Rupee of Jahangir* R D Shah *Five Rupee Coin of Aurangzeb* Sajid Nairn & Dilip Balsekar *Parenda a New Mint for Mughal Copper* *Coins* A H Siddiqui* A Notable Coin of Mughal Emperor Jaliandar Shah *S U Bhandare* * *Coinage* *of Maratha* *Rulers* *of* *Sawantwadi* Olof Sejer0e *Lead Coin* r *from Tranquebar* O P L Srivastava *Sealings of Three Unknown Kings of Pancliala* There are also five book reviews

Volume 157 (1997) of the *Numismatic Chronicle,* published by the Royal Numismatic Society, London (ISSN 0078-2696) includes the following items likely to be interest to ONS members Marcus Phillips & Tony Goodwin *A Seventh-century Syrian Hoard of* *Byzantine and Imitative Copper Coins* Vlastimil Novak* Fatimid and Post Fatimid Glass Jetons in the National * *Museum, Prague* Helen Wang *Local Bronze Tokens Issued in Jiangsu, China, in the 1930s* Michael Broome *Countermarked Islamic Gold Coins in Venetian Cyprus* Robert W Hoge *A Parcel of mainly 'Abbasid Gold Coin* There are also some book reviews

Pervin T Nasir *Rare Coins in the National Museum of Pakistan,* *Karachi* (Karachi, 1997), hardback, 242 pp with plates, price PRs 300 or US $50 plus PRs 50 for postage

The National Museum of Pakistan has around 90,000 "ancient" coins in its collection The author has chosen 360 rarities for publication in this book There are nine chapters plus appendices The chapters cover ancient coinage, Arab coinage, mediaeval coins, Ghaznavids, Sultans of Delhi, alien contemporary rulers of the early sultans of Delhi, the Mughals, the Durranis and Barakzais, native states

For further information, please contact the author who is Director, National Museum of Pakistan, Burns Garden, Karachi, Pakistan or the publishers The Times Press (Pvt) Limited, C-18, Al-Hilal Society, University Road, Karachi 74800, Pakistan

Volume 15 of the Hellenic Numismatic Society's publication *Nomismatika* *Khromka* *(1996),* actually published in 1997, contains a number of articles on the emergency money situation in the Ottoman Empire between 1880 and 1910, and an article by P G Kokkas on the akches struck at the Ottoman mint of Serres This features a whole series of types not previously published.

Wolfgang Bertsch *A Study of* *Tibetan* *Paper money with a critical* *Bibliography,* Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, Dharamsala (India) 1997, 93 pp, 21 plates of which 16 are in colour Price £10 plus £3 for postage or US$ 15 plus $ 5 from the author Bahnhofstr 34, 64380 Rosdorf, Germany

*Oriental Coins and their Values The World of Islam* by Michael Mitchiner A reprint of this well-known work is now available from Spink & Son Ltd, London (see address below) at a cost of £95 **Lists Received**

Stephen Album (PC Box 7386, Santa Rosa, Calif 95407, USA, Tel *++\\* 707-539-2120, fax +-t-l 707-539-3348, e-mail album®sonic net) lists number 142 and 143 (January 1998), Scott Cordry (PO Box 9828, San Diego, Cahf 92169, USA, Tel -i-H-1 619-272-9440, fax -i-i-l 619-272-9441) hst 109 (March 1998. of modern Islamic coins and rare Islamic banknotes This list  includes a fine collection of Tunisian coins Robert Tye (Loch Eynort, Isle of South Uist, UK, HS8 5SJ, Tel -1-1-44 1878-710300, fax -i-i-44 1878-710216) list 33 Spink Numismatic Circular for February and March 1998 have included selections of Islamic coins for sale (Spink & Son Ltd, 5,6,7 King Street, St James's, London SWIY 6QS, Tel +-I-44 171 930 7888, fax *++44* 171 839 4853)

**Corrigendum** Paul Murphy has informed us that the illustration of the Kosala coins published in Newsletter 154 was inadvertently scanned in mirror-image format Readers should make allowance for that when examining the illustration

# THE CHINESE QI XIANG CASH COINS **David Jen**

Among the treasures of the ANS collection of Chinese cash coins, the Qi Xiang species of the emperor Tong Zhi attract one's attention for the interesting story behind them.

As he lay dying, the emperor Xian Feng of the Qing Dynasty entrusted his six-year old son, the future emperor Tong Zhi, to the care of his eight ministers, and decreed that the reign title was to be Qi Xiang - Good Luck The emperor died two days later on August 22, 1861. Not long before, he had had a secret talk with his trusted minister Su Shun, stating that his favourite concubine Ci Xi was ambitious and he intended to do away with her before he died. Their talk, however, was passed on to Ci Xi by her favourite eunuch Li Lian Ying, who happened to pass by and overheard everything. Ci Xi managed to draw to her side Prince Gong, head of the other faction in the imperial court, and quietly went about with her plans.

The imperial cortege accompanying the deceased emperor's coffin departed from Jehol on 26 October, and Ci Xi reached Peking on 1 November The next morning seven of the eight ministers were seized and their head Su Shun, still on the road with the imperial cortege, was also put under arrest the same evening. This incident is known as the Qi Xiang Coup, and Ci Xi, the mother of the boy emperor, started holding court from behind the screen.

Ci Xi, however, was not the only empress dowager sitting behind the screens at the time. Also there was the other dowager Ci An, the wife of the deceased emperor. Ci Xi was only a concubine, but as the boy emperor's mother, she became dowager by right. The dying emperor gave his two seals of state, one to his wife Ci An and one to Ci Xi, an arrangement that later was to send Ci An to her doom, since it placed her in Ci Xi's way to absolute power, even though she was a straight person and stayed away from politics.

Before the November coup, coins bearing the Qi Xiang reign title had already come out of the mints and were ready for the inauguration ceremonies of the new emperor the coming year, but the coup aborted the coins, which were remelted to cast coins with the new reign title Tong Zhi the State to be administered jointly (by the two dowagers) For certain reasons a few Qi Xiang coins were preserved and some managed to find their way into the market, otherwise the public would not have known that such a specie had ever existed. Considering the three months time lapse between the adoption of the reign title in August and their withdrawal in November, it is a wonder the coins could have been minted at all. Surely the mint workers went about their work in great haste, to which the coarse quality of the coins bear testimony and their fate explains their scarcity.

The ANS is fortunate to have acquired several of the Qi Xiang coins through generous donations from the daughter of Mr. Reilly and others. The specifications are given below
1.  One Cash - Qi Xiang Tong Bao on the obverse, and Board of Revenue in Manchu script on the reverse (Not listed in the Fisher-Ding catalog); diameter 26mm, thickness 2mm, and weight 7.322g.

2.  One Cash - Qi Xiang Tong Bao on the obverse and Board of Works in Manchu script (FD-2565); diameter 26.5mm, thickness 1.5mm, and weight 5.925g.

3.  1 Cash - Legend same as above, only larger in size, diameter 27mm, thickness 2mm, and weight 8.01 g (FD-2584).

4.  10 Cash - Qi Xiang Zhong Bao on the obverse and Board of Works Value 10 on reverse (FD-2587): diameter 34.8mm, thickness 2.3mm, and weight 16.108g.

5.  10 cash - Qi Xiang Zhong Bao on the obverse and Tong Zhi Zhong Bao, the reign title succeeding it, on the reverse, with two reign titles on the same coin. It is not mentioned in either the Schjoth or Fisher-Ding catalogues, so it has no catalogue number. The handwriting of the legend, workmanship, size, alloy and other features are all identical with the regular issues, marking its source the same as the latter - the imperial mint. How and why it came into existence is not known, probably fun money cast by the mint workers in a moment of playfulness, an irresistible practice traceable to as far back as the Han Dynasty (206 BC - 220 AD). Anyhow, it is an attractive collectible and an impressive reminder of the winds of change on the political horizon.

6. 10 Cash - Qi Xiang Zhong Bao on both sides of the coin (FD2559). This recast was made 5 years later. It is said that upon the  request of the nobility, these coins were made as mementos, both sides bearing the same legend. The coin No.5 may also have been cast for the same reason.
The mint signature of the mint place of Yazd By M. I. Mochiri, Paris

*Background *The mint signature of the mint place of Yazd has been erroneously deciphered as* zl* in the past and attributed to the city of Zarang' In 1972, I corrected this misreading from *zl* to *yz* and attributed it to the city of Yazd-^ In 1977,1 published a coin of Khusraw I with the mint signature z/ ^ In a book, published in 1987,1 devoted a whole chapter to this subject in order to demonstrate the existence of this mint signature with two letters as well as their equivalents with three letters *zln* or with four *zing,* the latter forming the whole orthography of Zarang''

On the other hand, in another chapter of this latter book, I noted, in relation to Yazd, the existence of a second mint signature with three letters *yzd,* in other words with the complete orthography of the name of this city'

*Analysis *As demonstrated below, the mint signature of the mint place of Yazd is seldom composed of two letters and the one conventionally read as* yz* is actually composed of three letters *yzd*

The starting point of this analysis is a coin of Bahram V (42038) To date, this is the earliest known mint signature of the mint place of Yazd This signature is engraved in a cursive script Despite the bad state of preservation of the coin, it is clearly legible, one can easily discern the two letters *yz* (coin no 1) This inscription is totally different from the more frequently encountered signature which denotes the mint place of Yazd

During the following reigns, even if the mint place of Yazd continued to strike coins, at best the output would have been very low in view of the fact that it is not until the accession of Khusraw I (531-79) that coins from this city have been identified up to now For the reign of this king, the mint place of Yazd is well represented Indeed I have personally noted coins of 33 different regnal years and the number of known examples provides a relatively large body of examples for study

It IS apparently at the beginning of the reign of Khusraw I that one observes the creation of the mint signature of Yazd in three letters'" Unfortunately, the three first years are missing in my collection, but for the years 4 and 5 we discover the mint signature *yzd* with two different scripts, either in lapidary (coin no 2) or in
cursive alphabet (coins nos 3 and 4) In the following years, the latter becomes definitely the mint signature of Yazd The mint signature which had been formerly transcribed as *yz* is in reality composed of three letters \>, *z,* and *d,* with the second and third letters in effect being combined It is these final two letters which had been erroneously interpreted up to now as representing one letter *z*

The scribes or engravers who created this combination of letters are also those who are at the origin of the intermediary written forms, which allow one to find the combination of the two letters *z* and *d* Coins nos 5 and 6 taken at random among different regnal years demonstrate that between the years 4 and 5 where the mint signature in three letters is obvious as to its identification and Its definitive classic form, there is an intermediary written form The three letters *y, z* and *d* in cursive script are clearly separated on coins nos 3 and 4 For later issues, the two letters *z* and *d* close up in such a way that the left extremity of *z* joins the middle of the upper branch of *d* (com no 5) Thereafter, this point of intersection goes one step up (coin no 6) The next step reaches the highest point of the vertical branch of the letter *d,* so that one can draw the two letters *z* and *d* in one stroke keeping the pen on the sheet (coin no 7) ^ r~ X **^** ** ** **\_\_)--\_,** ** ** **-hi)** $$ -r=^ $$ **- J - J** In the drawing above, it is very easy to separate the two letters *z* and *d,* then by sliding the letter *d* for half a centimetre to the left and by bringing down the letter *z* the result is the epigraphy of the mint signature of the coin no 4 * * *,-* ***.*** ***nj*** >*::J _ J ^ ^ Consequently, on the left component of the mint, the vertical branch joined to the horizontal lower one constitutes the letter *d,* and the letter *z* itself is only represented by its horizontal upper branch

For coins of a century and half later, in 66 AH, one finds again the clear separation of the three letters *y, z* and *d* of the mint signature of Yazd on the reverse of a rare issue of '•Abdullah b Zubayr (coin no 8)

In conclusion, we should change our transcription of the usual mint signature of Yazd into YZD = *yzd* and use only YZ = *yz* for the mint signatures such as the one which figures on the coin no 1 of Bahram V CATALOGUE *Obverse* Bahram V

1 - Usual type Legend defaced and partly cut off

Khusraw I - Type of the first tour regnal years  2 - Legend on the right * * *^tiaui* * * *=* *hwslwd* 3 - Legend on the right jjA» JXI = *hwslwd*

- Type II of the fifth regnal year'  4 - Legend on the right * * *f-~* = hw Legend on the left (/e\*» $$ = 'p^,^ $$

*•* c) Type of the following regnal years 5 - Legend on the right itijj»- *= hwslwy* Legend on the left * * *^ScJJ* = *'pzw* 6 - Legend on the right _>»&a>t~ = hwslwy Legend on the left _Jt*'a*' = ' pzwy 7 - Legend on the right >3^>«" = hwtlwy Legend on the left i i^a" = *pzwn* *Reverse*

Classical reverse of the coins ot Bahram V On the right, the mint signature rl» *=* *yz* **YZ** Legends On the left On the right Legend on the left Legend on the right Legend on the left Legend on the right Legend on the left Legend on the right Legend on the left Legend on the right Legend on the left Legend on the right

->>JD = yzd = YZD **=üji,u** *** *** $$ ='LB' = ^ $$ -J-^^ * * *=yzd=\\ZXi* $$ -uJ»**' = hms '= 5 $$

# \_ j O $$ =>-2^ = YZD $$ ^«Jyvc $$ = chlsy = 34 $$ *\_\_t-J* $$ =yzd=\ZV)^ $$ \_ja»cio. * * =pncsy='i5 \_\_r^ =>zrf = YZD ^ v ü ^ c $$ = chldh = 14 $$ *\_r^* =>zrf = YZD
= *' pdwl'* *= yzwbyl'n* = GDH *= 'pzwt* ***Aiil-a^^*** * * *=* bismillah Legend on the left: Legend on the right KX>j'U>-u/ $$ = ssst = 66 $$ **(J-J** * * =yzd = YZD

**Abdullah b. Zubayr** Arab-Sasanian type of Khusraw II coins Legend on the right: j J ^ e ^ i Legend on the left: c-t^»

On the second quarter of the margin: At 08 30 H • *^* * * *i* * * $$ = m $$

# NOTES

1 FDJ Paruck, *Sasanian Coins,* New Delhi, 1976, R Gobi, *Sasanidische Numismatik.* Braunschweig, 1968 2 Mochiri, *ENIS I.* Tehran, 1972, p 48-50 3 Mochiri, EWS//, Tehran, 1977, p 137, fig 338. 4 Mochiri,/tSCWC, Leuven, 1987, p 86-9 5 * Ibid*, p 68 6 Translation from two to three letters of the mint signatures is observed in other mint places at the beginning of the reign of Khusraw I This is the case, for example, for the mint place of Hamadan where the mint signature with two letters AH, still present on his coins of year 1, becomes definitely with three letters **AHM** on those of year 2 7 For the detailed description of the four types of the fifth regnal year of Khusraw I, see *ENIS II,* p 217-20 8 This coin has already been published in £^75 //, Fig 960 9 For the detailed description of this com, see ASCWC, com no 105, PI XV, 87

## ^,.\*\*\*^;

**The Fineness of Ottoman Akces** **By W. Ilisch, M. Poniatowski, and H. Wilski**

**Preliminary Notes** Reliable data for the real silver content of Ottoman akces have - to the best of our knowledge - never been published. T^is fact had already been realised by Dipl.-lng Walter Husch (\*27. 10 1903, t 23. 2. 1976 in Dortmund-Kirchhorde, Germany)' a long time ago. Since Husch was an enthusiastic collector of Ottoman coins, he was interested in this question. As early as 1973 he asked Degussa (Deutsche Gold-und Silber-Scheideanstalt vormals Roessler) in Wolfgang near Hanau, Germany, for suitable analyses. For this purpose, he used 12 clearly legible akces These coins
were analysed under the guidance of Dr. Manfred Poniatowski, Degussa. In order to complete the series in the same year, two more akce coins (NP 253 and NP 340) were analysed by Dr H.J Ostmann of the Analytical Laboratory of Farbwerke Hoechst AG in Frankfurt/M-Höchst, Germany. Finally, Mr. Husch's records (although incomplete) came into the hands of Dr. Hans Wilski. The revised results are presented below.

**Introduction** According to a note of Lane-Poole, published in 1883 AD^, the fineness of the first Ottoman akces minted during the reign of Sultan Orhan (724 - 763 AH) is 90 %. Lane-Poole referred to a
book by Col Ahmad Gevad Bey, which is not accessible to us A few years later, in 1890 AD, Galib-' published a detailed list of the weight and fineness of both silver and gold coins minted within the Ottoman Empire This list has been used by all the later authors, eg Nun Pere 1968'\* or Schaendlinger 1973^ It seems that the question of whether the desired values of the fineness of the early akces given by Galib are in accordance with the actual fineness of these coins, has never been studied with the most reliable methods of modem analytical chemistry Since knowledge of the true fineness of these coins is of considerable interest for many reasons, this research work has now been carried out

**Experiments** As a consequence of the manufacturing process, the fineness of a coin at Its surface may differ from the fineness m its interior (for details see the last section) Therefore the use of a non-destructive test method which is applied only to a thin surface layer had to be rejected Instead, a "wet chemical analysis" had to be used which results in the mean value of the fineness of a coin as a whole Accordingly, in order to get precise results approximately half of each coin was dissolved in 50 % nitric acid The silver content was then determined by potentiometric titration (Metrom-Titroprocessor) with a solution of sodium chloride The very small gold (Au) content of each com could be determined only semiquantitatively by spectral analysis in an electric arc In table 2, the specification "\< 0 5 % Au" means that the gold content found was less than 0 5 %,but more than 0 1 %

The research work at Hoechst AG was done in the same way as before, but additionally the copper content of the coins was also determined Since the total amount of both metals found was not 100 %, but only 98 6 % (NP 253) resp 98 1 % (NP 340) (see table 2), Dr Ostmann looked for the missing material An X-ray analysis showed qualitatively the presence of small amounts of lead (Pb), zmc (Zn), and iron (Fe) These metals are known impurities of the silver of the time in question An analysis for gold was dropped in these cases

**Results** The first table shows the fineness of the akces minted by the Ottoman sultans from Orhan (724 - 763 AH) to Mehmed IV (1058 - 1099 AH) as tabulated by Galib^ According to this table, the  fineness of the first akces is said to have been 90 %, and then decreased in the course of nearly 400 years to 50 % With the beginning of the minting of the kurush by Suleyman II (1099 1102 AH) the akces lost their importance as currency Of the many Ottoman documents that deal with problems of coinage^ only the documents from 1390 - 1512 AD translated by Beldiceanu (into French) were accessible to the present authors^'^ It is noteworthy that in the documents of the time of Mehmed II (848 - 849, 855 886 AH) which deal with silver mining as well as the monetary system nothing is written about the fineness ol the coins, though the weight of the akces and the fact that it changed four times has been discussed'^ On the contrary, in an explanatory annotation Beldiceanu feels obliged to refer to Galib's data, namely 90 % "

For technical reasons only coins from Mehmed Celebi (806 816 AH) until Mehmed **III** (1003 - 1012 AH) could be analysed by us On the one hand, it was expected that the real fineness would agree with Galib's data (within the error limits of Ottoman minting technology) On the other hand, the expenses for the research work had to be kept within reasonable limits Therefore only one or two coins at best of each sultan were analysed Table 2 shows the results These are unexpected and surprising Only the fineness of the two coins of Mehmed I from Ayaslik and Bursa respectively come within the error limits, with the value of 90 *%* given by Galib The coins of his successor, Murad II, show a varied result Bursa 79 %, Edirne 97% The very high silver content of 97 % decreases within 100 years only insignificantly to 93 % at the time of Suleyman I The coins of Suleyman I show only the year of accession to the throne (926 AH) But since his coins were minted throughout his whole reign, the period ot time may have been much longer than 100 years During the reign of Suleyman's successor, Selim II, the fineness suddenly decreased to 83 % for a coin from Edirne and to only 53 *%* for a coin of Novabirda In these cases the decrease m fineness was perhaps done intentionally
by workers at the mint Such an assumption can be put forward in the case of a sultan whose rule suffered allegedly from considerable maladministration The coin of Murad **III** also shows a low fineness of only 78% But this value can easily be explained by the well-known reduction in the fineness of the coins which led to the Jannisaries' uprising in 997 AH (April 1589 AD) During the reign of Mehmed **III,** the coins were minted again with the old fineness of 95%

Our results do not agree with the silver content as given by Galib 90 % fine for the period of time from Orhan to Mehmed II, and 85 % for the interval from Bayesid II to Mehmed III The real fineness of the coins analysed by us is (in most cases) considerably higher than those values Although the number of coins we analysed is only small, the result would seem to by typical rather than random -otherwise it would be difficult to understand the small but steady decrease in fineness during a period of more than 100 years that we found It would be desirable for the results presented here to be corroborated and completed by more analyses There is also a need to find contemporary documents dealing with the fineness of the akces minted

**A metallurgical study of the coins** It is well known that the planchets for the akce (as well as for other coins) were annealed before minting to soften the metal During this heating process, the copper which is near to the surface is oxidised to black copper oxide After the heating process the planchets are pickled in hot, dilute sulphuric acid to restore a silvery surface During this process the copper oxide is dissolved and It remains as a thin layer of pure, though porous silver on the surface This layer will be compressed again by minting Incidentally, this treatment has the advantage of the inner, more sensitive material, which sometimes has a high copper content, being protected against corrosion by the thin layer of pure silver In order to make these layers visible a metallurgical study was carried out For this purpose the cut surfaces of the halved coins were burnished, then polished, and finally photographed with a metal microscope, the enlargement being 260-fold Fig I shows the results The inner part of the oxide layer which could not be dissolved by the pickling process is visible only in the two upper illustrations (NP 27 Bursa and NP 253 Novabirda) The compressed silver layers on the other hand are clearly visible in all three coins It is roughly 0 004 to 0 010 mm thick The pickling process was done best with the coin of Murad **III** (at the bottom of fig I), the copper oxide was completely dissolved, and the oxidation process was most successfully done. References:

1 A short obituary was published by K M MacKenzie in NI Bulletin 10, 141 (May 1976.  2 S Lane Poole, The coins of the Turks in the British Museum, Vol VIII London 1883, page XVII 3 I Galib Taqytm-i meskiikat-i'otmantyye, Constantinople 1307 AR (1890 AD), silver coins in table 2 on page 506 4 N Pere, Osmanlilarda Madeni Paralar Istanbul 1968 S A C Schaendhnger, Osmanische Numismatik Braunschweig 1973 6 G R Puin, in preparation 7 C Ender, Documents of numismatic importance in the Ottoman archives (Turkish numismatic Society, special Bulletin No 3), Istanbul 1996 8 N Beldiceanu, Les Actes des premiers sultans conserves dans les manuscrits turcs de la Bibliothèque Nationale a Pans I Actes de Mehmed II et de Bayesid II du ms Fonds turc ancien 39 Pans 1960 9 N Beldiceanu, Les Actes des premiers sultans conserves dans les manuscrits turcs de la Bibliothèque Nationale a Pans II Réglements miniers 1390- 1512 Pans 1964 10 loc cit 8, page 173 11 loc cit 8, page 83

**Tab.** **1. Fineness of Ottoman** akces **according to Galib** ' The years indicate the first and last year of reign of the respective sultans

Sultan Fineness %Ag 724 Orhan- Mehmed II 886 AH 886 Bayesid II- Mustafa 1 1032 AH Murad IV 1032-1049 AH Ibrahim 1049-1058 AH Mehmed IV 1058-1099 AH
**Table 2. Weight and fineness of Ottoman akces.** All names are written in modem Turkish. The years given are the years of coinage or (in parentheses) the years of accession to the throne. Small blanks in the table are due to the incompleteness of the records from 1973. Missing weights have been substituted by weights taken from the book by Nuri Pere (in parentheses). NP = Nun Pere, tr = traces

# NP **No.** **Sultan**

Mehmed ^elebi **and** Timur Mehmed I Mehmed I Murad II Murad **II** Mehmed **II** Mehmed 11 Bayesid **II** Selim I Sijleyman 1 Selim **II** Selim **II** Murad **III** Mehmed **III** **rf...**

**Year** **AH** (926) (974) (974) (982) (1003) **Mint**

Bursa Ayaslik Bursa Burs Edime Edime Serez Kostantaniye Edime Novabirda Edime Novabirda Kostantaniye **Diameter** **mm**

# 11-13 11-13 II 10-11 10-11 **Weight** **gram**

# 1.15

1.20 **I.** GO **1** 10 **1** 13 1 02 0 88 0 75 0.70 0.70 (0.5-0.6) 0 50 (0 4-0 7) (0.3) **Fineness**

**%Ag** 94.76 89.22 91.41 79.13 97.07 95.33 95.29 95.31 94.09 92.98 83.4 52.84 78.22 95 0 **Other Metals**

< 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au < 0.5% Au
l5.2%Cu;trPb, Zn, Fe < 0.5% Au, < 0.5% Au 3.1%Cu;trPb, Zn, Fe

-Layer of pure silver •Separation of copper-1-oxide --Silver-copper alloy 94 76 % Ag Mehmed Celebi and Timur (NP 27) **•l?"~** -Layer of pure silver Separation of copper-I-oxide Silver-copper alloy 52.84 % Ag Selim **n** (NP 253) \* - ^ ~ Layer of pure silver -Silver copper alloy 78 22 % Ag Murad lU

*Fig.* *I-* *Cross-sectional view* *of* *three* *ackes.* *Enlargement* *175-fold.*

**Almatu - a Newly Discovered Chaghatayid Mint** **by Vladimir** Nastich (Moscow)

The story behind the discovery of the Almatu mint commenced in 1979 when a lady visited the Archaeological Museum in Alma Ata and showed me two crudely struck silver coins with barely legible Arabic inscriptions, resembling the Chaghatayid post-reform dirhams of the late 13th century. The woman said that they had come from a small hoard ("perhaps ten or twelve pieces") excavated in the same year during earthworks in the Alma Ata frontier School courtyard and divided among the school officers. When I asked her to identify the other people who had them, so that I could attempt to reassemble the hoard, or at least sell me her own specimens, she flatly refused and did not even allow me to retain her coins for study.

The coins belonged to the same unknown type: each one of them had the same couple of tamghas, one of which - an oblong *2* -like sign crossed by a straight line in the middle (see fig. 1), had been very common for the anonymous regular Chaghatayid coinage during the reform of Mas'ud Beg' (mostly within AH 670706), while the other one, looking like a trident with uneven prongs, one ending in a loop, and annulet at the opposite "handle" end (see fig.2), was quite unfamiliar to me.

Since the coin legends were no longer legible, 1 could provide only general conclusions about the time of their production and dynastic affiliation, and their relationship regarding local money circulation, the latter being evident from where they were found. But there was a very important additional fact: the Frontier School was located upon the remnants of a spacious mediaeval settlement, the upper layers of which together with the surrounding vicinity, according to former archaeological inspections and material findings (including coins), could with confidence be dated back to the pre-Mongol and Chaghatayid periods^- With that information, I dared to make a very careful suggestion that the coins in question could have been struck at some as yet unknown local mints of Semirech'ye-'.

In 1989, my old friend and amateur numismatist from Alma Ata, Dr V. Dubinin, presented me with a silver coin he had purchased some time previously in the local coin market and which bore the same tamghas. He also told me that the owner (probably an aged serviceman) had two more similar pieces in worse condition and that the coins had been allegedly found somewhere in Alma Ata. The piece 1 obtained in that way was certainly not one of the coins I had seen before. Although I could not remember those pieces in every detail after ten years, I did remember clearly their whitish silver colour, while the newly acquired specimen was covered with an unpleasant dark greenish-grey patina. The date indication was preserved, which I at first interpreted as distorted by abridgement through lack of space as Ai\> \<UM *...yearfive* (?). The mint-name, however, was no longer visible. fig-

# O fig.2
1. Silver  *Obverse* in circular field within a plain, single-line circle, tamgha 1 in the middle, tamgha 2 to the left, two parallel lines to the right, several thick dots or pearls dispersed without any order between the signs Outside the circle, a fragment of a mostly effaced Kufic legend...iJIVI^... \[ no Go\]d but Allah *Reverse* in square field, two lines in ornamental Kufic r,-iu,» / I ^1,11 *The greatest sovereign*

Outside, Kufic legend (small letters) forming the inner square

*This \[dirhem\] has been struck * *year* ij> Severe die weakness at one edge, effacement, obverse off-centre, diameter 22-24 cm, weight 1 73 g (see fig 3) fig 3

The next step towards the discovery took place in Frunze (now Bishek, Kirghizia) several years later when my friend, G Velichko, told me about a Chaghatayid silver hoard found recently in the Kurdai Pass some 150 km from Alma Ata He thought that at least three coins in that hoard ought to be similar to my specimen, for they bore the same trident-like tamgha, unfortunately, while examining the coins he had not been able to decipher the Arabic legend By then I had studied almost all the available literature on the Chaghatayid coinage and many hundreds of actual coins, so that the rarity of the coinage in question and the limited area of its distribution, left hardly any doubt about its local origin I intuitively felt that their place of minting had to be somewhere in the region of modern-day Alma Ata

Finally, in 1990, my Moscow friend, A Koifman, showed me two more coins with the same tamghas, acquired from a visitor "from the south" (presumably Uzbekistan or Kazakhstan) Both were different in outward appearance from each other and, as far as I could remember, different from all other pieces I had seen before One of them was badly obliterated and did not lend itself to any closer attribution, except for its general similarity to those I had already come to know, but the second one was special and can be described as follows

2. Silver.  *Obverse* In field, tamgha 1 with six "pearls" around its central line and two symmetrical, knotted vignettes on both sides, Kufic legend beginning and ending with the same knot-like sign between ordinary single-line circles

3i *The* *power \[belongs\] to Allah, the One, the Omnipotent'* *Reverse* in field, tamgha 2, ornamented with "pearls" and vignettes, as on the obverse, circular legend (undotted Naskh-like script) in similar ^ ai> AM>uJi JlJLiA^ijjJI e i* < _ i ^

*This dirham has been struck in Balad Almatu \[in\] year* -U\> Three ornamental "pearls" in line above «u-n fig 4

There are several weak spots, slight effacement, with both sides a little off-centre, diameter 22 mm Weight 1 87 g (see figure 4)

All the inscriptions are clearly legible Some points require brief comments

1 Grammatically incorrect «A» instead of correct masculine \| jj^ before (\*\*j-»JI IS rather common throughout the Mongol coinage of Central Asia Sometimes it is met with in the plural construction ifc»lj-^' \* J\* *these dirhems,* which may be the source of the error

2 The word jJu *balad,* has various meanings town, province, district, country, and, as such. It can denote a regional rather than municipal character of the issue In all probability, Chaghatayid uniform silver coinage of the period between the reforms of Mas'ud Beg and Kepek (Kibak Khan), perhaps like most other silver issues in the history or coin circulation, was intended to serve trade throughout the state, irrespective of the place of minting On the other hand, as far as we can judge, in most cases the mint names coincided with those of the appropriate cities and their rural or pastoral environs The only exception could be if regional denominations were different from urban ones, for instance *al-Shash* was never a town name, but in the Samanid and early Qarakhanid coinage we often meet it alongside or in turns with *Binkath* or (later) *Banakatli/Fanakath* which were successively the mam towns in the al-Shash region In our case it seems very likely that *Almatu* represented both the town and Its vicinity

3 The word * * *J^^* has been engraved without *nuqtas* but, taking into consideration all the above, there is little room for doubt The original Kazakh name for Alma Ata is pronounced like *almati^,* and this very form has been fixed in written sources since the first quarter of the 16th century The term itself means "apple", used adjectivally eg "Apple \[place\]" or "Apple \[country\]", *alma* being the root, and *-ti* the relative suffix An objection may be expressed as to the last letter in the Arabic version, namely that * * *,*
would seem to fit the phonetic property of the final vowel better than * * *J* against which I can simply quote the only example from another coinage, namely that of Mengli Giray Khan at Kaffa (Crimea),where the same Turkic suffix (more exactly, its soft allomorph) *-li* appears on the coins of one and the same year (most often within AH 900-903) in both graphic forms seemingly at random- *j* *^*
and y i ^ 4 Both the coins described have completely preserved the parts of the legends where dates ought to be placed * * *tj» ti^i* in one case and ai\> 4 ^ the other At first glance (and reasoning from all we know about coin dating in mediaeval Muslim Asia), they look as though a mere truncation has taken place because of the miscalculation of space during die engraving, and resemble a distorted

(for *five),* as 1 thought until recently^ One day, the obvious likeness of the various elements suddenly struck me, and 1 clearly saw the full dates on both coins' Moreover, they were different, though adjacent If we remember that every letter of the Arabic alphabet has its numerical value in the Abjad system, and represent the undotted units Jut\> and «i» in more suitable chronogram versions as *^^\>* and 4i> respectively, we obtain the year figures for AH 684 (AD 1285) and 685 (AD 1286) This interpretation turns out to be consistent with other features of the described coins and all available data relating to the post-reform silver issues in the Chaghatayid state This reading may, of course, be disputed, but there is at least one comparable event in the anonymous silver coinage of Jujid Khorezm, where the date has been indicated as * *\,..•>.*

(read U..;. ) and thus can be surely deciphered as AH
Thus we can state the existence of one more mint, in addition to the 16 known and at least two unpublished as yet, which were either reactivated or newly established to provide enough coinage for carrying out the monetary reform initiated by Mas'ud Beg in the Chaghatayid khanate about 670/1271-72 The rarity and limited dates of striking of these coins of Almatu indicate that this local issue was intended mainly, if not exclusively, for supplying the regional market that was remote and separated from most of the other economic centres of the state This would explain why the coins in question have never been found, either as solitary examples or in hoards, outside the region of Almati, situated on the north-eastern borders of the traditional cultural areas of Mawarannahr

The identification of the Chaghatayid mint of Almatu, besides Its numismatic importance, allows us to make more profound inference of certain historical value Firstly, the name **jjuJI** placed on the com from the late 13th century can be actually taken for the earliest known record of this toponym applicable to today's Alma Ata Hitherto is was known to be mentioned in *Babur Namah* by Zahir-ud-din Babur (1483-1530), who cited Almatu, together with Almalyq and Yangi (Taraz) as well-known towns ( *** *** ***jij^^)*** situated northwards of Ferghana and by his time already destroyed by the Mongols and Uzbeks^ In another part of the same work, Babur mentioned 914/1508 as the exact date of a battle "in Almatu, that renowned locality in Moghulistan" The same event was also reported in *Tarikh-I Rashidi* by Babur's cousin, Mirza Muhammad Haidar (killed in 1551) whose information thereon is unlikely to have been independent of the former author

After that we come across only a few scrappy references to this settlement or vicinity in several manuscripts of little informative value That it continued to exist as an economic unit, or at least never ceased to be inhabited by a more or less constant population, is attested by the endurance of its name over seven centuries Notes

1 among the coins of at least 18 mints of that period only dirhems struck at Termez seem never to have borne this sign V D Zhukov, "Dukentkij klad monet", in *htoriia* *material* *noj kul lury Uzbekfitana* issue 1, Tashkent 1959, p 1777 sq, E A Davidovich, *Denezhnoe* *khoziajstvo* *Srednej Azii* *posle* *mongul \\koj\>o zavoevamia* *I* *reforma Mas ud beka (XIII* *Vj* Moscow 1972, p 15,62-66 2 *Arkheoloiiicheskam* *karla* *Kazakhsianu* Alma Ata 1960 p 116 317, descriptions No 4373, 4374, 4384 & al, the mentioned site No 4381 3 V N Nastich, "Monetnyc dvory sredncvekovogo Kazakhstan in *Paimaatmki* *istoni I* *iswrn* *kul* *tury Kazakhstaiia* issue 4 Alma Ata 1989, p67 4 Beginning with 1854 when a Russian fortress Vemoe ('the Reliable ) had been built there and a new colonial settlement had started to grow up. Its name (Vernyi) kept on being connected with that stronghold, until as late as 1921 It was renamed Alma Ata The native population of the town never accepted this name, for it represented a strange artificial Russification of the original name 5 V N Nastich, "Almatu neizvestnj monetnyj dvor XIII v ' in *Barlol dovskie* *thieniia* Moscow 1993 p 68 69 6 G A Fedorov-Davydov, ' Mumizmatika Khorezma zolotoordynskogo perioda, in *Numizmahka* *I* *Epij\>rafika,* vol V Moscow 1960, p 180 and tab I type 2, the publisher, however, did not venture to name the date which he probably considered as too early for the coinage, and left the description as "no year" 7 *Baber name* *ill* *Zapiski Sultana Babera* Izdany v podlinnom tekste N I, Kazan 1857, p2

**Who were the "Chionites"** **By Roger Wai San Doc**

The term *Chionites* first appeared in Ammianus Marcellinus s TVie *Late Roman Empire^* since when the term has been randomly and erroneously used by historians and numismatists as a synonym for the early "Hephthalites"

In the course of research on Hephthalite coins, the author noted that It has been a major problem to establish an acceptable chronological classification of Hephthalite coins This problem is not only associated with Shapur II's ventures (Eastern Campaigns, Siege of Amida) but also directly related to the classification of Kushano-Sasanian and Kidarite coins

*Chionite* is a middle Persian word meaning "Xiyon = Hun" or "Khyon = Hun" according to R Frye^ In the western sense all nomadic people from the steppes have been referred to as *Hun,* regardless of their origin, races, tribes or clans In the Chinese texts nomadic peoples from the north or north-west areas have been first
referred to by a general term *Hu,* while later, for the tribes from the Western Provinces (Xi Yu), they are still referred to as *Hu,* but those with a direct descendent line from the Xiong Nu (i e *Hun* in the Western sense), have been referred to as *Lu* These tribes were recorded by contemporary or late historians in the Chinese texts, they were able to distinguish the tribes and clans, and from their surnames the genealogy can be traced and correlated

To correct and clarify the term *Chionites,* the author proposes to elucidate the general history and movements of Xiong Nu based on the Chinese historical records

*The Xiong Nu * The earliest that Xiong Nu's activities were recorded in the Chinese texts was 312 BC They were nomadic people grazing in the present Shanxi Province in China When they moved south they came into conflict with people who lived along the Chinese northern and north west borders When Qin united China in 220 BC, the first emperor Shi Huangdi build the great wall to prevent such invasions by tJiese nomads

In AD 48, as a result of an internal power struggle, the Xiong Nu were divided into North and South divisions The North Xiong Nu remained independent, while the South Xiong Nu became vassals of the Eastern Han Dynasty From time to time, however, the South Xiong Nu continued to wage war against the Eastern Han Dynasty

In AD 88, internal dissension within the North Xiong Nu erupted into civil war The South Xiong Nu seized the opportunity and, with the aid of the Eastern Han army, defeated the North Xiong Nu in several large-scale battles The defeat was total to the point that the North Xiong Nu could no longer graze in their own territory They therefore started to move west, eventually totally vanishing from China

Chinese history has no record of North Xiong Nu activity from AD 153 onward In western history the period between AD 91 to AD 290 IS blank as far as the Huns (North Xiong Nu) are concerned

Based on the migration route of Da Yue Zhi, the North Xiong Nu first occupied the land of Wu Sun (c AD 91-95) and Kang Ju (c AD 158) In AD 370 the North Xiong Nu annexed the A-Lan (Alani) and settled for the time being in districts near the Aral and Caspian Seas The North Xiong Nu never moved south into the territory of Sogdiana, where they would have encountered their traditional enemy - the Da Yue Zhi (Kushans) The Da Yue Zhi had already by that time established the powerful Kushan Empire

*The Rise Of The Kidantes *No evidence is available in any history records as to how the Kidantes rose to power In the* Xi Yu* section of Wei Shu (Annals of the Wei Dynasty) certain traces of the Kidantes can be inferred The *Xi Yu* section describing Su Te (Sogdiana) was written as follows

*initially, the Xiong Nu slayed the king (of Sogdiana) and * *occupied the whole country, it lias been three generations already* *since the accession of the king Hu Ni*

This passage was reported to the court of Wci by the envoys Tung Wan and Gao Ming in AD 437 upon their return from Xi Yu Western scholar, F Hirth, was the first person to translate this passage He referred to Su Te as *Sughdag* and the Xiong Nu king was Attila's son Hernac or Ellac

Japanese scholar Hokuton referred to Su Te as *Sogdiana* but the Xiong Nu king was the Hephthalite Khan Khushnawaz Enoki also referred to Su Te as *Sogdiana,* but the Xiong Nu king was *Chionite*

Recent Chinese scholar, Yu Tai Shan, concluded that Su Te was *Sogdiana* and that the Xiong Nu king was a Hephthalite Khan From this short passage, many conjectures have been made by various scholars, yet none of them have made an in-depth study of the term *Chionite* and its status If we assume 100 years for the "Three Generations" from the passage quoted above, the event could have occurred some time around AD 337 to AD 347

F Hirth's interpretation cannot be validated because the death of Attila occurred in AD 453, i e it happened later then the event in question Hokuton and Yu both placed the western migration of Hephthalites around AD 366-367 In fact the Hephthalites from the Altai Mountain region did not start to move west until AD 420 Enoki has not clarified the term *Chionite,* hence the mistake
It IS the authors view that neither the Xiong Nu nor the Hephthalites were involved in this incident at that time, the only possibility was the Kidantes, for they were the only powerful group of people at that time capable of attacking the Sogdiana Principality The Kidantes, of course, were still under the banner of the Kushan Empire The term *Xiong Nu* was inaccurately used in the passage by the Chinese envoys After the Kidantes slayed the Sogdian king, they established a puppet government and Hu Ni was the fourth king of the line There is, however, no information available as to which tribe Hu Ni cam from Considering the time frame, it is noted that thereafter the Kidantes became very powerful, strong enough to be placed alongside the Eusini (The Kushans) during Shapur II s Eastern Campaign This is the most important evidence yet explaining how the Kidantes came to power and replaced the Kushan Empire at a later date Numismatically no Kidante coins have been found in the Soviet Central Asia Distinct, the reason being that the Kidantes were still vassals of the Kushan Empire (until AD 385), but Kushan coins on the other hand have been found in quantities at many places in the Sogdian Region'

*Eastern Campaigns Of Shapur* *11* Ammianus Marcellinus mentioned only very briefly that Shapur II was spending the winter (AD 356) in the territory of the Eusini and Chionites No information was provided as to who the Chionites were If the Chionites were Hume nomads we find no record in history texts as to their movements and limits of grazing territory The Eusini on the other hand were different, as they had already founded the Kushan Empire, hence the Chionites must be one of the clans of the Kushan to remain in their domain

The Kidantes are sometimes known as the *Little Kushan* to differentiate them from the Kushan proper - *The Great Kushan* It must be noted there are two records of the *Little Kushan* or *Xiao* *Yue*

*Zhi* in the Chinese texts They represent two distinct groups of tribes at different periods and had no relationship to each other

As noted above, the North Xiong Nu never moved south into the Sogdian Region This dismisses the possibility that the Chionites Shapur II encountered were North Xiong Nu They were not the Hephthalites either, for the Hephthalites who lived in the Altai Mountains at that time were still a vassal tribe of the JouanJouan and did not start their migration west until AD 420, due to the pressure arising from the war between the Gao Ju, Jouan-Jouan and the Northern Wei For these reasons it is only the Kidantes who can be identified to as the *Chionites* of Ammianus Marcellinus

The Kidantes occupied an important position in the administration and military organisation on the Kushan side They called themselves as the *Kushans* and probably held important positions in the Kushan government, for after Shapur II's Eastern Campaigns, some thirty years later, the Kushan Empire was totally replaced by the Kidante Dynasty The Eastern Campaigns of Shapur II were by no mean successful, the first campaign in AD 356 ended with a treaty, and during the second campaign in AD 367 Shapur II was totally defeated by the Kidantes and lost complete control of the Kabul Valley

Numismatically, *Piryasa* or Piyasa was cited on the gold stater of the late Kushan king Gadahara This is a positive attestation of Kidante suzerainty *Piryasa* or *Peroz of Gandhara* by Carter"\* undoubtedly was the founder of the Kidante Dynasty

*Siege OfAmida * The siege of Amida, led by Shapur II, followed not long after the first Eastern Campaign (AD 356) Historical records and numismatic materials provide two rather confusing and contradictory pieces of evidence

It is now generally accepted that Shapur II's first Eastern Campaign ended with an agreement with the Chionites and the Eusini that the former would agree to participate in the siege of Amida Ammianus Marcellinus also mentioned that the king of the Chionites was Grumbates, not Piryasa. a fact which totally discredits the possibility that the Chionites, allies of the Eusini, had actually participated in the siege The Chionites led by Grumbates were the North Xiong Nu It must also be remembered that after the Shapur II campaign, Piryasa took most of his time to consolidate his power within the Kushan realm It is most unlikely
that he would have sided with his enemy Shapur II, especially when there was a risk that he could be killed by Shapur II and not by the Romans

Ammianus Marcellinus described Shapur II in the battlefield during the siege

*He had exchanged his diadem for a helmet in the shape of a * *ram's head*

A D Bivar suggested that it was Varahran II Kushanshah instead of Shapur II This suggestion was supported by most numismatists because they considered that no Sasanian king's diadem had the ram's head design Such an assumption can be justified based on the standard diadems of the Sasanian kings as depicted on the coins and on the rock reliefs at Firuzabad, Naqsh-IRustan and elsewhere Nevertheless, this can only be interpreted as a scene of "Investiture and Victory", i e it is more decorative art than standard rule

Gobi has identified 8 types of crown for Ardashir I, 4 for Shapur I, 2 for Narseh, 2 for Ardashir II, 3 for Peroz, 2 for Kavad, 2 for Xusro II, 2 for Ardashir III and 2 for Yazgard IIP All these crown types have been verified on coins It can be postulated that apart from a regular diadem for a Sasanian king, special diadems also existed for special occasions After all, Ammianus Marcellinus said Shapur II changed his diadem into a ram's head helmet, not a ram's head diadem

Rock carvings from Tang i-Ab, Firuzabad, clearly depict Shapur I not wearing his traditional diadem, but instead an eagle head helmet depicting a battle scene with the Parthians Later on, to commemorate the invasion of Hatra ( AD 241-242 ), a coin was minted also showing Shapur I wearing the eagle head diadem

This is yet another piece of evidence to show that Sasanian kings changed their standard diadem into specific types of helmets on the battlefield

Numismatic studies by leading authorities on the gold stater of Varahram II Kushanshah, showing the king wearing a ram's head diadem, have vaned greatly in terms of assigning a reigning period A comparison is made as follows M Mitchiner" M Carter' R Gobi J Cribb Varahran II Kushanshah Varahran II Varahran 4 Varahran AD271-3'i6 AD 340 350 c AD 379 383 (Peroz III)"' (No 1309) (Plate49, No 34) (No 1714) (No 10)

It can be seen that even with close similarity of the coins no consensus of opinion has been reached and no unified date has been agreed upon

None of these dates can fit into the time frame of the siege of Amida Mitchiner's, Carter's and Gobi's dating come before or after the siege Although Cribb did not give a date, he identified this Varahran as Peroz III who was the founder of the Kidante Dynasty He had no possibility of joining Shapur II in the siege of Amida

In this respect no Kushanshah with a ram's horn diadem actually participated in the siege, Shapur II exchanging his diadem into a ram's head helmet was only a symbol for the victory of the siege

*Conclusion * We can deduce the following conclusions from the above

The North Xiong Nu, originally a nomadic tribe from China, never moved south into the territory of Sogdiana when they migrated west They wandered in the area of the Aral Sea and the Caspian Sea far from the Kushans, until they invaded Europe under Attila They did, however, assist Shapur II at the siege of Amida

*Chionites* were not Hephthalites. they were in fact the North Xiong Nu or the Kidantes This is based on the fact that the
Kidarites occupied Sogdiana circa AD 337-347, while the Hephthalites did not appear in this district until AD 420 or later.

There were no independent tribes of nomadic origin by the name *Chionites.* It has been randomly used as a term for all the nomadic tribes with no details on their origin.

No Kushanshah participated in the siege of Amida. One cannot justify A.D. Bivar's suggestion according to present numismatic evidence *References*

1. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,  Everyman's Library, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, Toronto. Vol. II, chapter XIX.

Ehsan Yarshater, *The* *Cambridge History* *of* * Iran*, Vol.3 (I), 3 (2), Cambridge University Press, 1983. 2. Richard N. Frye, *The Golden Age* *of* * Persia*, Weidenfeld, London, 1975.  Chapter 3, pp. 38-39. 3. Richard N. Frye, *Notes on the Early Coinage of Transoxiana,* Numismatic Notes and Monographs, No. 113, ANS, 1949. pp. 7-13. 4. 7. Martha L. Carter, *A Numismatic Reconstruction* *of Kushano-Sasanian* *History.* ANSMN 30, 1985. 5. Robert Gobi, *Sasanian* *Numismatics,* Klinkhardt and Biermann,  Braunschweig, 1971. 6 Michael Mitchiner, *The Ancient and Classical* *World.* Hawkins Publication, 1978. pp. 205. 8. Robert Gobi, *Munzpragung des* *Kusanreiches,* Wien, 1984. Plate 64, No  714-717. 9. Joe Cribb, *Numismatic Evidence* *for* *Kushano-Sasanian* *Chronology,* Studia Iranica, Tome 19-1990-Fascicule 2. Plate II, No. 10. 1 am grateful to Dr Lawrence Adams for his kind permission to reproduce the above coin from his collection.

**Three Interesting Ancient Indian Coins From The** **Sammlung Köhler-Osbahr, Duisburg** **By Shailendra Bhandare and Ralf Althoff**

Amongst the 1000 or so ancient Indian coins in the Köhler-Osbahr Collection, three specimens could be described as noteworthy and command a preliminary publication to facilitate further attention from other specialists in the field.

Two of these coins are of an ancient Indian group of dynasty of kings known as the kings of Panchala, the classical geographic area near Ramnagar, dist. Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh. The capital of Panchala was said to be the town of Ahichhatra, and most of the kings known from locally found coins have "mitra"-ending names. The coinage of Panchala has been extensively described by K. M. Shrimali in his monograph'. The non-availability of this important monograph to both the authors did not allow them to confirm whether similar coins have been included in it. Nevertheless, the characteristics of Panchala coins from the Köhler-Osbahr Collection make them worth a second publication. The coins may be described as below:

- Metal: Potin or Arseneous Copper (The metallic composition has  been deduced purely from the physical appearance), 11.90g

Obv.: A deep incuse in centre, as is the case with most Panchala coins. Within the incuse, two symbols looking hke circles attached with curvilinear loops on their right side. The circle on the top has longer lines, and a series of dots, arranged in two rows of three each, on its left side. At the point where the long lines on right meet the circle, two small prongs protruding from the circle are also seen. In isolation, the symbol may be represented as (fig. I). **fig.** I fig. II

The second symbol is very similar to the first, but it has shorter lines on the right. It also has two lines with hooked ends on its left. This symbol can be represented as (fig. II). Below these two symbols a legend is seen in Brahmi characters, which reads *Bha Nu* *Mi Ta Sa,* meaning "of Bhanumitra" (skt. Bhanumitrasya).

Rev.: A tree with perfectly horizontal branches with leaves represented as dots between them, with a railing around it. A strange symbol composed of a clo.sed semicircle and three circumferentially arranged dots, to the left. II. Metal: Potin or arseneous copper, I3.44g

Obv.: Similar to coin (I.) but the legend reads in Brahmi *A Gi* *Mi Ta Sa.* standing for "of Agnimitra" (skt. *Agnimitrasya).* The coin is countermarked on this side with a mark similar to the second mark, but smaller in size.

Rev.: A tree within a railing as on coin (I.), but with branches at an angle as against horizontal on coin (I.). The semicircular symbol with dots makes a partial appearance on the left side.

The importance of these coins lies in the fact that they show a remarkable deviation from the characteristic type-features of the usual Panchala issues. The regular issues invariably have a deity on reverse whose iconographic aspects corroborate the name of the issuing kings. Instead of this feature, these coins have a tree in railing on the reverse. However, the fact indicating that they are Panchala issues lies within the similarity of the symbols on these coins with the regular Panchala issues. The symbol placed just above the name is an integral part of regular Panchala coinage, except that on them it is seen in its vertical form. The symbol countermarked on coin (II.) is identical with this symbol. Also, the regular Panchala Coins show a tree with horizontal branches (fig. 3. just above the name on obverse. In addition to the similarity in  symbols, the manufacturing technique yielding a deep incuse on obverse and palaeography of the inscription also indicate that the coins published here, although anomalous, are in fact Panchala issues.

Coins of this type are not totally unknown. One specimen with the name *Suryamitra* has been listed by Mitchiner^. This coin is also countermarked on the obverse, as is the case with the coin in the Köhler-Osbahr Collection. One more specimen of the same *Suryamitra* type and counter-marked on the obverse was noted in the collection of Jan Lingen, by one of the authors (Bhandare). It is likely that Mr. Lingen's specimen is identical with the one illustrated in Mitchiner, although Mitchiner quotes a different provenance for it.

III. 5-symbol Punch-marked coin The Stag *Karshapana*
The third interesting coin from the Köhler-Osbahr Collection is an imperial 5-symbol Punch-marked coin, classically known as *Karshapana.* The importance of this coin lies in the fact that it brings forth a hitherto unknown zoomorphic symbol. Flora and Fauna are very well represented on PMC's and the masterwork by - L. Gupta & Terry Hardaker illustrates snake', owl'\* camel^,  donkey^, and frog^ apart from the commoner elephant, bull and rabbit marks.

The coin from the Köhler-Osbahr Collection shows a deer, or rather, a stag with elaborate horns placed over his head. The execution of the animal is very neat and considering the size of the punch, meticulously detailed. Along with the associated symbol, it can be classified into series IVd and may be placed near no. 452 of the Gupta & Hardaker catalogue. The coin is shown here in full and with enlargement of the stag symbol (fig. 4). The combination of five symbols is shown as fig. 5. ***s*** fig. 4 fig. 5

The authors wish to thank Mrs. Gertraud Neumann of the Kultur und Stadthistorisches Museum, Duisburg for providing the photographs for this papers. References:

1. Shrimali, K M, History of Panchala, New Delhi 1983.  2 Mitchiner M., Oriental Coins and their values. Vol. 1: The Ancient and Classical world, London 1978, P. 574, no. 4548. 3. Gupta, P. L. & Hardaker, T. R., Ancient Indian Silver Punch-marked  coins of the Magadha-Maurya Karshapana. series, Nasik 1985, series Va, no. 484. 4. Ibid, series Via, no. 538.  5. Ibid, series Va, no. 496.  6. Ibid, series Va, nos. 489-491.  7. Ibid, series IVb, no. 378; series Ivd, nos. 398-403

**Notes on a few Ancient Coins** **By Bob Senior**

One of the pleasures of collecting Oriental coins is that new varieties are always turning up, many of which are worthy of a small note. Recently I have found sufficient Indo-Scythic coins to cause me to re-do my catalogue of the series which was ready for publication. This will entail months of work but at the same time I can completely revise the numbering which was becoming strained in view of the extra coins surfacing. These notes concern a few coins that have come my way in the last few weeks alongside the above-mentioned Indo-Scythic coins.

1. *Tetradrachm of Elymais.* This unusually fine and complete  coin is a variety that I have never seen before. It is of seemingly pure silver and weighs 15.47 gm. The portrait resembles that of Kamnaskires III with Anzaze (see Alram 454') and his dress is similar to that worn by Kamnaskires III on those coins and those of Kamnaskires IV. On the reverse there is a bearded bust, monogram before, contained within a square legend 'BAZIAEQL KAMNASKinOY TOY Ef BAIIAEQZ KAMNASKinOY'. This reverse type is normally given to a Kamnaskires V though the **legend** also occurs on the coins of Kamnaskires IV (as identified by Michael Alram). On this coin the legend is as perfectly clear as on the latter's coins and not garbled as on the base silver coins of

Kamnaskires V. I admit that I haven't kept up-to-date with this series and maybe somewhere there are similar coins or newer theories published but from the evidence of this coin I would suggest a different interpretation of this coinage. On my coin there is a trace of a date below the legend and though mostly off the coin, the middle letter seems to be certainly A. In fact I feel confident that the date is 0 A I = 239 or 74/3 BC in the Seleucid era. Having read this I tried to find more dates for the series and only then discovered that the joint Kamnaskires with Anzaze corns are known dated as late as 76/5 BC.

Since the reverse type is known on **base** silver and copper coins as late as 36/5 BC it seems unlikely that they were all struck by one king..The young portrait coins (Alram 458j and older portrait coins (Alram 461) with a different reverse (seated Zeus, as on the joint coins with Anzaze) may represent a different mint, or series rather than a different king. These latter coins bear dates in the 60's and 50's BC. Since the earliest known date for Kamnaskires **(III)** is c. 82 BC we may postulate a period of some 30 years during which both reverse types were in use. Thereafter the coinage became debased, legends corrupted and these coins were possibly struck for several decades by another Kamnaskires (?) or possibly during an interregnum. This new coin would suggest that too many Kamnaskires may have been created from the few known obverse portraits and reverse types.

2. Not illustrated. In Michael Mitchiner's 'Ancient and Classical  World' (MAC) he illustrates a hemidrachm of Diodotos (1599) which Osmund Bopearachchi omitted from his Bibliothèque Nationale (BN) catalogue of the series. Perhaps this was due to the king's name being absent from the coin. Osmund may have thought it could be an issue in the name of Antiochos. I have in my possession a second specimen of this extremely rare issue with the same monogram as on the previous coin (which I believe was also in my collection originally), but with the king's name clearly shown AIOAOTOY. 1.85 gm.

3. A square copper of Apollodotos I with EI on the obverse (as BN  6D) but NO field letters or monogram on the reverse. 9.46 gin.

4. *Menander.* A square copper of BN série 28 but with no obverse  monogram and *Sam* (Kharosthi) in the reverse right field. 2.26 gm. This is clearly not the same as BN 28H with *Sa.*

*5) Strata tetradrachm.* This 'type' is published as BN 23C but an interesting feature is that the king's helmet is armoured and not the smooth type shown on all other published issues of this type. The armoured helmet appears on issues 2 and 6 when he is still a boy but the older portraits have only the smooth helmet (23 and 28). Issue 16, the spearthruster type, has an armoured helmet. As Strato matured he expanded his titles and this unique variant of type 23
not only introduced a new monogram but seems to suggest that there was a transition between his youthful types (with armoured helmet) and his later mature portraits (wearing a smooth helmet). This coin would be the latest of the former, it weighs 9.22 gm.

6. *Hermaios drachm.* This is a posthumous issue with straight  diadem ties and monogram in the right field. The coin has a copper core and hence its weight at 1.36 gm. The monogram Bl is new for Hermaios though it may be related to the BO appearing on some later coins of Zoilos II (?) and B on coins of Apollodotos II. More complicated monograms using BA or **BAl** appear on coins of Hermaios (BN 2A), and Apollodotos II and Azes. One Azes tetradrachm issue with Zeus Nikephoros reverse has BI in the upper right field.

7. *Ancient copper.* The obverse seems to have a flower design or  possibly a portrait of Heracles?! The reverse has « The remarkable thing about this coin is 'S fl 7^ that it is 8 mm thick but only 15.5 mm i I i i broad. It weighs 6.90 gm.

*S)* *Ancient copper* similar to MAC 44 18/9 but very thin and only half weight. 2.08 gm. Not illustrated.

9. *Coin of Kujula Kadphises.* These small coppers usually weigh  around 2 gm and have the legends off. A Kharosthi letter usually appears in the left field. On this coin the flan is unusually large and the weight is 3.61 gm. It seems to be an earlier version (or double unit?). On the obverse, the Greek doesn't resolve itself into anything meaningful. Zeus is to the right (as on coins of Abdagases and Gondophares-Sases - with vertical sceptre) and there is a Kharosthi *Va* before him. On the reverse, the seated king has an inscription that seems to match that published in MAC (2880) but with the **clear addition** of *Yavugasa* (the equivalent of ZAOOY). **-•^^**

10. *Kushan* *copper.* This small copper has a nimbate standing king  (seemingly helmeted) on the obverse putting incense on a fire altar. A Kharosthi letter may be before the king's face. The legend is unclear but may begin on the right with OOE(SHKI) = Huvishka? On the reverse is Siva with the bull Nandi - to the **right** The legend in the right field resembles AHOHA but the reading is uncertain. The weight is 3.74 gm. This coin falls into the class of well known 'Kashmir' type coppers, which are often magnetic

(usually with a black patina). This coin is not magnetic. As far as I know, no coin is reported with this reverse of either Kanishka or Huvishka. MAC 3440 shows a similar coin, of Vasu Deva, which is copper, twice the weight but with Nandi to the left. This unusual coin is an important addition to the depictions of Siva and may indicate that one of Vasu Deva's predecessors initiated the type.

11. A *tetradrachm of the Kharahostes family.* Previously I have  suggested that a coin type in the name of Azes (A) may have been issued by Kharahostes and have been the higher denomination to the coppers that bear his name. This was a tentative suggestion based on the appearance of the Kharosthi letter *Kha* in the right field and the fact that the type is known only from a hoard where this was the only 'Pallas' type of Azes and most of the other coins were posthumous or very late issues. Now this new coin has surfaced which bears the same symbols and monogram as on the coins of Hajatriasa, Kharahostes' son (and the coinage probably by him that was issued prior to them but in the name of Azes). It has the simplest form with no extra symbols or letters on the obverse apart from the three-armed symbol before the horse. The Greek is closest to the original. Most remarkably it has the *Kha* on the reverse in the right field, exactly as on coin A and unlike any previously known coin of this type. Again, there are no extra symbols or letters apart from the left monogram. It weighs 9.46 gm and suggests that there may be a stronger link between coin A and the coins of Kharahostes than I had previously supposed. This coin came from a large hoard (reportedly 600-1000 coins) from Swat, many of which were sold in Germany in 1996/7.

12. I have recently acquired a 1/4 denomination of the copper of  Azilises with Hephaistos obverse/lion reverse (not illustrated). This last year has seen several 1/4 denominations surface of coppers of Maues and Azilises that were previously unrecorded. It would seem that most, if not all, of their Hazara issues were struck in both denominations - unit and 1/4 ( no halves). The few gaps still existing will surely be filled in the coming years.

13. Finally - details of a small hoard, also from Swat, of IndoGreek drachms. Seen but not photographed.

Apollodotos I round drachm - BN 2 Lysias drachm BN 3A with young portrait. Antialcidas BN 9A, lOA, 12B (one elephant right, one elephant left and king with straight diadem ties), 12C (monogram under throne), I3A (three but one without cross bar to A in the monogram).

Philoxenos BN 4G Diomedes BN 4B Hermaios and Calliope BN 2B Posthumous Hermaios BN 1IH (in mint state). Most coins were EF-ish and one or two of the Antialcidas drachms were mint state. NOTE 1 Alram M., *Iranisches* *Personennamenbuch* Vienna 1986.
**Addendum To Information Sheet No. 28** **The Coinage Of Some Rewa Kantha, Gujerat, India.** **By KW Wiggins and M Culver**

The publication of Information Sheet No. 28 aroused some interest among those members who collect and study coins of the Indian States. Several members have notified some new types, variations and overstrikes and these are listed under the heading of the state in question. Type numbers are as given in the original paper. ***Lunavada*** Obverse

#,^^ir Reverse

#.t.«

# •J)^' *Coins of Dalai Singhji* Obverse 3. ^.

# • '-^5 Reverse Wt. 9.2g 8.2g Wt. 3.7g 8.1g

This is a new type of coin. From the partial inscription on the obverse it is probably a paisa of Dalpatsinghji (1849-1851). The inscription is m Devanagari but incorrectly engraved. A possible full reading is •^\[êTTcT. The ^ could be the final letter of Dalpat. The word following is inscribed as

The obverse shows a katar pointing left, with the partial name above it. The reverse has fragments of the *bad shah ghazi* legend. (M Culver)

This is a similar coin. The name above the katar is not on the flan. An interesting feature of this coin is that it is overstruck on a paisa of Baroda, dated 12xx, regnal year 23 (Cr. 33.3). Baroda coins of this regnal year (Muhammad Akbar II) are dated AH 1243 = AD 1827-1828. (M Culver)

This must be a half paisa with a obverse similar to No. 1 in the original paper (B Rhode)

Similar to the above but with the ruler's name positioned under the emblem. (J Lingen)

This appears to be a paisa of Type 4 struck on Type 5. The reverse is a jumbled *bad shah ghazi* legend, but part of the name *Dalai* can be seen. (B Rhode) ***Sunth*** Obverse Reverse Wt.

8.4g A paisa with the usual reverse of *Sri Rampur* and the obverse showing a number of spear-like weapons. Struck on a coin of unidentified origin. (J Lingen)

| 7.6g | A paisa. The obverse with two fly whisks. Usual reverse. | (J Lingen) |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 6.9g | A paisa with four katars arranged in a circle on the obverse. | (J Lingen) |
| 9.3g | A paisa similar to Type 5 but with more hands shown on the obverse. | (B Rhode) |
| 7 8g | Paisa Obverse: a flag. A rather crudely engraved reverse. | (B Rhode) |

6.9g A paisa with four katars arranged in a circle on the obverse. (J Lingen)

9.3g A paisa similar to Type 5 but with more hands shown on the obverse. (B Rhode)

7 8g Paisa Obverse: a flag. A rather crudely engraved reverse. (B Rhode)
7 6g Paisa Four hands arranged cross-wise on obverse (J Lingen)

8 3g Paisa A round coin, whereas most are square or irregularly shaped The obverse shows three or four standards with flags (N Buis)

7 25g Obverse a number of katars arranged in opposition Reverse fragments of the usual inscription

7 6g Obverse similar but has been overstruck with Type D Usual reverse

# TP

-Ul^HM?. 8 6g Paisa Type 3 overstruck on Type 8 (J Lingen)

•^ 3;iTqyï 7 8g Type 1 overstruck on a paisa of Baroda dated AH 128x (Y 7a) Therefore struck after 1865 (J Lingen) *Uncertain* *Issues* Obverse

# \[K^ Wt 4 3g 7 5g 4 8g

This appears to be somewhat similar to the halt paisa depicted as Nos in the original paper (M Culver) 1-6

This coin IS quite unknown but may be a paisa of Sunth which was inadvertently struck with two obverse dies (J Lingen)

A totally unknown coin which cannot be connected with any of the types previously described (B Rhode)

**The Hyderabad "92" mystery** **By Tony Holmes**

**I** had been intrigued by the number "92" which appears on many Hyderabad cons Rev R Plant, in his book *Arabic coins and how to* *read* *them* states that he does not know what it means - and as his knowledge is so wide, this was a real challenge' Collectors of Indian coins of vast knowledge could not enlighten me

Nor could I make any progress until last year when I stumbled on the answer in another context I was about to publish this great discovery when it was mentioned more or less casually by Jan Lingen in his article in the last issue of the Newsletter Perhaps I can still explain it for those who, like me, did not know the derivation of these figures, which certainly seem too high for a regnal year

The Hebrew alphabet has numerical values attached to the various letters, taken in their correct alphabetical sequence The corresponding Arabic letters have the same numerical values, and this is known as the *abjad* system (from the first four letters, like our *ABC)* After the first four letters, however, it is the Hebrew and not the Arabic order that is followed (see opposite column)

So Muhammad, which in Arabic is MHMD = 40-1-8-1-40-1-4 = 92, and writers copying out texts sometimes abbreviate the name by writing in its place the Arabic figures 9K(92) So clearly this is what IS meant by this number on Hyderabad coins, it corresponds to the pious invocation found on so many Muslim coins

## 1 2 4 5 6 7 8 10 20

# A B J D H W Z H T Y a K

## 30 40 50 60 100 200

# L M N R

There are in fact a couple of numismatic parallels known to me the coinage issued in Hadhramaut (now in Yemen) for the city state of Ghurfah, with the AH date 1344 (AD 1925/6) has the figures 129 in the legend, meaning *Saleh,* a reference to the local sultan Likewise Haidar Ah in Mysore uses the number 222 to mean *Haidar*

Plant was very close to the explanation, for he set out the *abjad* system and showed how it was used by Nadir Shah as a chronogram - words, which, when the letters of which they are composed are translated into numbers, add up to the date of his accession (AH 1148)
**A Hoard of Kushan Coins from Nepal** **by Nicholas Rhodes**

Although a number of Kushan coins have been found in Nepal', these have always been single finds, and it has generally been assumed that they circulated in the region in the pre-Lichhavi period, namely before 464 AD^. A recent hoard found in Nepal suggests, however, that Kushan copper coins were used in Nepal until at least the seventh century.

In about 1993, a Kathmandu money-changer, Mr Prushotam Shrestha, showed me a group of about five hundred and fifty copper coins, said to have been recently unearthed in the Nepalese hills, to the west of Kathmandu, at a place about two days walk from Pokhara. The coins were almost all completely flat discs of copper, but a few were identifiable, and I was able to select eleven pieces, which can be described as follows: 1-3 Kanishka Obv: King with cloak; Rev: Standing deity, arm raised to left Wts.15.60, 14.15, 13.97 Huvishka Obv: King seated on couch; Rev: As last. Wt. 12.34 5-6 Huvishka Obv: King on elephant; Rev: As last. Wts. 13 82, 13.13 7-8 Mananka RGV. 1 Wtsl3.31, 13.28 9-11 Illegible Wts: 13.68, 12.60, 12.47

The Kushan coins were all extremely worn, none had any trace of any legible legend, and all the identifiable pieces appeared to be of unremarkable varieties. One of the Mananka coins was in relatively fine state, the only such piece in the hoard when I examined it, although other better Mananka coins had apparently been removed from the lot earlier. The second Mananka coin was heavily worn, but still had traces of the legend visible. Both the Mananka coins, and most of the Kushan coins had a distinctive grey green patina, with small green adhesions to the surface, and no sign of corrosion, although a few showed the red copper of the metal content. None of the coins selected responded to a magnet, and I believe it unlikely that any of the coins in the hoard were of the RGV5-6 varieties, which have significant iron in the alloy, or of the RGV7-16 varieties, which have lead in the alloy.

The remarkable aspect of the hoard is that the Kushan coins probably date from the mid-2nd century AD^, whereas the Mananka coins date from the last quarter of the 6th century^. I feel, however, based not only on the information from Mr Shrestha, but also from the patina on the coins, that there can be no doubt that all the coins came from the same hoard. This demonstrates that Kushan coins circulated in Nepal during the Lichhavi period, and that they provided an easily available prototype for the weight and fabric of the first Nepalese copper coinage. The Kushan coins must, therefore, have been over four hundred years old at the time of deposit, and the state of wear is consistent with long circulation. However, it is not possible to tell whether the Kushan coins had been brought to the hills only during the sixth century, or whether they had been circulating there for several centuries. What the hoard demonstrates is that, when Kushan coins are discovered in Nepal, it should not be assumed that they reached there before the Lichhavi period, and similar caution should be taken in other regions when using worn Kushan coins to date archaeological strata. Notes

1. Rhodes, Gabrisch & Valdettaro, *The coinage of Nepal,* Royal  Numismatic Society, 1989, p. 15. 2. G Verardi, *Excavations* *at* *Harigaon.* *Kathmandu,* ISMEO, Rome,  1992, p. 184. 3.  Based on the chronology proposed by Joe Cribb at a lecture to the Royal Numismatic society in May 1997. 4. Rhodes, Gabrisch & Valdettaro, *op.cit.* pp. 28-9.

**A Late Lichhavi Hoard from Nepal** **by N.G.Rhodes**

In late Spring of 1997, a villager from Panch Khal, about 50km east of Kathmandu, noticed on the spoil heap from the construction of a new road on a hill near his village, an old earthenware pot. On closer examination, he noticed that it was full of copper coins, so
he took it home. Later, he took his find to Kathmandu, showed the coins to local money-changers, who told him they were valuable, and showed the pot to the Museum, who told him it was worthless. The pot was smashed and thrown into the river, and the coins were gradually sold in the market.

While in Kathmandu this autumn, I was informed that there had originally been about one thousand two hundred copper coins in the pot, and perhaps two hundred have been sold to date by the villager, including what are probably the most interesting pieces. One informant had visited the villager in Panch Khal in September, and had seen the remainder of the hoard, but was unable to purchase them. While in Kathmandu, I was able to photograph about fifty of the more interesting coins, and it is now worth publishing an initial report on the hoard, which contains a number of previously rare or unrecorded types.

I illustrate below a selection of coins from the hoard, together with weights of the examples that I happened to acquire from the hoard. They can be described as follows: RGV - Type G.2b

1. Obv: Bull standing right, crescent & dot above. RGV 104,  Rev: Legend *Pasupati* around sun symbol, three buds in angles. N\*

2. As last, but no dot in crescent. RGV 97. R(2.49, 1.95, 1.23\*,  1.19)

3. As last, but only one bud in angles on rev. RGV 97 var.  R(1.46\*)

4. As last, but crescent and dot in angles on rev. RGV - N\* RGV - Type G.2c

5. As no.2, but crude rev. as RGV 164. R(1.02\*)  6. As last, but very crude rev., with no legend, as RGV 165.  R(0.99\*) RGV - Type G.3e

7. Obv: As no.l, but rev. legend in four petals. RGV 119 var.  N\*,R(1.31)

8. As last, but obv. as no.2. RGV 119. R(2.25, 1.88, 1.12, 1.08,  0.92, 0.88, 0.87\*) RGV - unpublished

9. As last, but bull facing left. RGV - R(1.34\*, 1.17)

10. As last, but bull has front leg raised. RGV - N\* RGV - unpublished

11. Obv. as rev. of 7; rev. as no.3. RGV - N\*, R(1.53) RGV- Type G.7

12. Obv & Rev, both have legend in four petals, and fifth letter  in central circle. RGV 159.

13. As last, style differs. RGV 159 var. N\*  14. As last, style differs. RGV 159 var. R(1.86)  15. As last, central letter *Sri* reversed on both sides. RGV 159  var. R( 1.75)

16. As last, but central letter not inverted, and on rev. is not in  circle. RGV 159 var. R( 1.14)

17. As last, but rev. as no.4, but with Sri in circle, rather than  sun symbol in centre. RGV 159 var. N\*

Others of Type G.7 - R(2.06, 2.00, 1.96, 1.78, 1.60, 1.53, 1.44, 1.43,1.09) **•** **• •**
# u

# \\ - - - V Sri Si Va De

## a a w z: ïT?r 5

# ^ B - \* **,y** *c\\* -^Ü.' •-'' - X.. 'vli **r3** »!«=

**^** ** ** **^** ** ** **'** ** ** **ï** ** ** **'** ** ** **^** ** ** **^** ** ** **^** ** ** **^** ** ** **^** ** ** **;** ** ** **^** ***\[***

# 1 G **-«** / ' - • • ^

The above selection is certainly not representative of the complete hoard, but may be regarded as representative of the coins that have been sold in the market, albeit without some of the minor varieties, particularly of RGV 159, that were only present in very few numbers. Since the vendor was charging a fixed rate per coin, irrespective of type, it has only been the more unusual varieties that have so far been sold.

The hoard is remarkable, in that perhaps about two hundred pieces are of types that were previously either unknown or very rare, and the other thousand pieces are apparently rather light, and hence probably late, varieties of the rather common type, RGV 97. Following the classification used in RGV, the hoard can be dated on numismatic grounds to the end of the reign of Narendradeva, or early in the reign of Sivadeva II, around 680 AD, and since these types have appeared so rarely before, this seems to be the very latest hoard of Licchavi coins to have been discovered. Most of the coins seem to be heavier than the very light examples listed as RGV 163-65, so it is likely that even later Lichhavi coins do exist, but the pieces I have seen from the hoard are clearly relatively late in the series.

Since there were no examples of RGV 160-62 in this hoard, and no specimens of RGV 159 in the only hoard we know of to have contained examples of RGV 160-62, the dating of the second Vrsha type must be queried, and may well belong rather earlier in the seventh century, suggested as an alternative dating in RGV, but without further hoard evidence, nothing can be proved either way.

One of the problems that I had not previously been able to solve was the reading of the obverse of RGV 159. The reverse reads very clearly *Sri* (in the centre) and *Pasupati* in the petals around. The obverse also has *Sri* in the centre, but in the petals are what appear to be the letters *Sivadeva,* and if this reading is accepted, the coins can be categorically dated to the reign of Sivadeva II who ruled from c680-690. The calligraphy is rather unusual for Lichhavi coins, and is certainly different from that on the stone inscriptions of this period, so I set out below the letters as they appear on those coins with clear legends. Certain letters are occasionally reversed, as can be seen.

The weights of the specimens in my own collection range between about 0 8g to just over 2.0g, consistent with other late coins of Type G

In conclusion, this can only be an interim report on this important new hoard, but I should like to thank Alexander Lissancvitch and Prushotam Shrestha for information regarding its discovery and contents, and for allowing me to examine the specimens in their collections.

**The Tibetan Grain Tokens** **By Wolfgang Bertsch**

Fig. **I** Grain token struck over Tibetan 5 sho copper coin

In 1983 the late Karl Gabrisch published two Lhasa grain tokens struck on Tibetan 5 Sho copper coins, after the original design had been more or less thoroughly erased With the help of H Chang and L Brillant, Mr Gabrisch read the legend almost correctly as *La* *Hsiu Han/Ml Liang/Ssu Liang* which would be the following in Pinyin transcription which is presently used in China: *La Xiu* *Chang* */Ml Liang /Si Liang.* ' As translation, Gabrisch gave *Lhasa* *factory / millet ration/ four Liang.* Subsequently, Mr Bruce W. Smith suggested a completely different translation for the first part of the legend: *La Hsiu Han = La Hsiu (place name)* *cliff,* mentioning that there exists a monastery called *La Hsiu* in southern Qinghai province.^ After inquiries which 1 made in Lhasa in autumn 1997 regarding the origin of these tokens, I can confirm Mr Gabrisch's reading and translation. The first part of the legend consisting of three Chinese characters is actually an abbreviated form of the following, with the characters not found on the token places within parentheses.

## i^l^S-,^ ^

**La** **(Sa** **Oi** **Che)** **Xiu** **(Li)** **Chang**

This translates as *Lhasa motor vehicle repair factory (workshop).* The Tibetan name of this workshop supposedly was: **Lha-sa** **Mo-ta** **bZo-gra**

This workshop was founded some time after 1959 and was active till about the end of the Cultural Revolution and located west of the Norbu Lingka (summer residence of the Dalai Lamas).

The legend within the central circle reads *Mi Liang,* which can be translated as *quality rice,* while the two characters below refer to the amount of rice (grain) for which this token is good: Si *Liang* (four Liang).

At that time (1960s) there was a great food shortage in Tibet (as in most provinces of China) due to enforced collective farming and the introduction of wheat unsuited for Tibet's high altitude. In these difficult times, most workers were paid with ration coupons
or received these at least as part of their payment. I illustrate an example of these coupons (Fig.2) which were issued in Tibet before and during the Cultural Revolution - probably at about the same time when the copper grain tokens were introduced for the workers of the Lhasa Repair Workshop. FpfSW^WB^^ip **/**

# L ***J*** Fig 2 Tibetan ration coupon

The coupon is good for one rOya-ma or one Chinese Shijin (city jin) of grain, about 1/2 kilogram. It was issued by the *liangshi* *guanli ju* (Grain Management Bureau) in 1960 The legend in Chinese and Tibetan on the reverse mentions that it is forbidden to forge or alter or sell these coupons and that they cannot be replaced if lost.

According to an informant from Lhasa, each worker of the repair shop received about 10 of these tokens per month in addition to his salary, which was about one Yuan a day One token could buy 4 Liang (= ca. 150 grams) of rice or barley, the former being preferred by Chinese workers and the latter by Tibetans. Alternatively, one could consume three bowls of rice for one token in the factory's canteen.

All the tokens which were known so far, are struck over Tibetan 5 Sho copper coins, but recently I acquired a specimen struck over a Tibetan 3 Sho copper coin. The original coin was dated 16-20 (AD 1946), both obverse and reverse designs were imperfectly erased and enough of the obverse design of the 3 Sho coin has remained on the side which was not restruck. This has allowed an easy identification of the original coin. \[Ed.: the illustration of this coin has unfortunately not reproduced very clearly\]

It is likely that most of these tokens were melted down after the Lhasa Repair Workshop had closed towards the end of the Cultural Revolution, which would explain why these tokens are quite scarce nowadays.

# NOTES

1 Gabrisch, Karl *Grain tokens from Tibet* In ONS Newsletter 82 (1983) 2. Smith, Bruce W *A* *token from* *Tibet''* In East Asia Journal, issue no. 5,  first quarter 1983, p 71

**Pattern coins for the Sultan of Sulu** **By Michael Anderson**

# AM' **J^.** **Ov^L-iiSIi^**

Spink Numismatic Circular for September 1997 listed and illustrated as no. 4623 a pattern cent in the name of a Sultan Muhammad Jamala'l-a'azam. This coin, together with its half and quarter, was discussed at length in an article by the late Major Fred Pridmore in Spink Numismatic Circular for September 1979, pp 378-380, under the title *Are they pattern coins for British North* *Borneo?* More recent references have been in *A numismatic history* *of the Birmingham Mint* by James O Sweeney (Birmingham 1981), pp 96-6, and *The encyclopaedia of the coins of Malaysia,* *Singapore and Brunei 1400-1967* by Saran Singh (second edition, Kuala Lumpur 1996), pp 375 and 383.

Saran Singh says that no sultan bearing the name Muhammad Jamala'l-a'azam was know to have existed in Sulu or Brunei around the period when the pattern coins were struck. The ruler of Sulu at that time was Sultan Jamulul-a'lam. He says that it is probable that the name on the pattern coins could be a fantasy which was inserted to acknowledge a former hereditary ruler of northern Borneo by the new regime of Arthur Dent.

This seems to me too complicated. If the name is a fantasy, how does its use acknowledge a former hereditary ruler of northern Borneo, and why should Overbeck and Dent wish to acknowledge such a ruler rather than the existing ruler of Sulu, from whom they had just obtained the concession for North Borneo in return for an annual payment of 5000 dollars? The inclusion of the name Muhammad is not, as thought by Pridmore, an obstacle, since, as I pointed out in a letter published in Spink Numismatic Circular for November 1979, p 507, Muhammad is an integral part of his name (the actual grant to Overbeck and Dent commences *We,* *Sri Paduka* *Maulana Al Sultan Mohamet Jamal Al Alam Bin Sri Paduka Al* *Marhoum Al Sultan Mohamet Fathlon, Sultan of Sulu and the* *dependencies thereof* and ends *written in Lipuk, in Sulu, at the* *Palace of His Highness Mohamet Jamal Al Alam, on the 19th* *Moharam, AH 1295, answering to the 22nd January, AD 1878).* That the Arabic *za* can equate to a Roman letter "1" in the names of Sultans of Sulu can be seen from the coin of the Sultan Alimuddin (Azim-ud-Din) illustrated in Dr Angelita Ganzon de Legarda's *Piloncitos to Pesos* (Manila 1976), p 47. There should therefore be no difficulty in identifying the name of the Sultan Muhammad Jamala'l-a'zam on the pattern coins with the sultan who ruled Sulu from 1862 to 1881.

Fig. 3 Grain token struck over Tibetan 3 sho copper coin © Oriental Numismatic Society 1998

*Oalalu Print Ltd. Old While Lion, Llunftllin.* * * *POWM* *SY22 5BX*
# ONS Newsletter 155 - Supplement

March, 1998 **An Index to Mitchiner - World of** **Islam** **(1977)** - Edmund Hohertz

## Ever since Michael Mitchiner's much used and referenced book The World of Islam appeared in 1977 users have been frustrated by its lack
of an index At long last this has been rectified and I am pleased to be able to make available to ONS members the following two-part listing

## Part I: Keyword Index

**Part** **II:** **Dynasty Index (Modified from Bosworth** ) Please inform me of any corrections, additions, etc in order to make this index of value to future users

## H Edmund Hohertz

13070 Old Pleasant Valley Road Middleburg Hts, OH 44130, USA h9027683@nohio wviz org **Key to Abbreviations:** *Works Cited* **Mitchiner, Michael.** *Oriental coins and their values* Vol I The World of Islam London Hawkins Publications 1977 The dynasty list and coin photographs are sometimes separated by many pages If two page numbers are listed, the first is to the dynasty information and the second is to the catalogue listing **Bosworth, Clifford Edmund.** *The New Islamic Dynasties* New York Columbia University Press, 1996 **Entry Notes** NI = Non-Islamic coin listing NC = No coins listed in the catalogue

## Part I: Keyword Index

Abbadids of Seville (Muluk al Tuwaif) Abbasid Caliphs of Bagdad Abbasid Governors of Tabanstan Abbasid Provincial Coinage Bokhara Abbasid Provincial Coinage Seistan Abbasid-Hamdanid Period, Cilicia during Abbasids, Later Abu Daudids (Banijurids) Adil Shahis of Bijapur (Deccan States) Afghan Civic Copper Coinage Afghan Plateau, Iranian - (Seals) Afghan Revolt Afghanistan during Viking Samanid Period, Sweden & Afghanistan, Local (Simjund) issues of NE Afghanistan, Samanid Ghaznavid coinage of N Afghans (Suns) Africa, Egypt & Syria, Fatimids of N Aftasids of Badajoz (Muluk al Tuwaif) Aghlabids Ahar, Kings of Ahmadabad, Nawabs of (Maratha States) Ahmadly, Qizil (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Ahmadnagar, Nizam Shahis of (Deccan States) Ahom Kingdom of Assam Aidin (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Ak Koyunlu Turcomans of the White Sheep Al Andalus Cordoba Al Bu Said of Oman & Zanzibar Al Jezirah, Zangids of Al Rahman, Port Al Saud (Wahabis of Nejd) Alaya, Beys of (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Albania under Venice, Dalmatia and Aleppo Series, Pseudo (Crusader) Aleppo, Mirdasids of Aleppo, Zangids of Algeciras, Hammudids of Algeria (Post Ottoman Coin Series) Algeria, Ziyanids of TTlemcen & W Almeria. Banu Sumadih of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Almoravids Almoravids, Taifas Alwar

Amid, Hisn Keyfa & (Ayyubids of Diyarbakr) 153,158 090 NC Amid Inalids of (Diyarbakr) ** **Amid Urtukids of Hisn Keyfa and** **081,082 Amirate of Ghazni 084 NI Amirids of Valencia (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090 NC Amirs of Denizli (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) 200 NC Amirs of Sind Andalus, Al (Cordoba) 128,130 Antioch (Crusaders) 327 NI Arab Byzantine Arab Sassanian Arabia Kingdom of Saudi 231,233 289 296 Arabian Larins, Later Aragon 113NI 128,145 Arbela, Atabegs of (Bektiginids) 128, 145 Arcot, Nawabs of (the Carnatic) 436,440 Armenia Atabegs of (Begtimurids) 115 116 Armenia Rupenid Kingdom in Cilician 091 NC Assam, Ahom Kingdom of** **093,095 Astrakhan, Janids of Atabeg Countermarks on Byzantine Folies** **Atabegs of Arbela (Bektiginids)** **Atabegs of Armenia (Begtimurids)** **374,375 Atabegs of Azerbaijan (Ildegezids)** **Atabegs of Damascus (Bunds)** **200 201 Atabegs of Pars (Salghurids)** **Atabegs of Luristan (Lur Buzurg) (Hazaraspids) Atabegs of Nehavend Atalik Ghazi of Kashgar Atchih Sultanate 455,468 Athens (Crusaders) 328 NI Awadh Awadh, Kings of** **322 NI Ayyubid House of Saladin** **Ayyubid House of Sephadin** **122 NC Ayyubids** ** Ayyubids of Diyarbakr (Hisn Keyfa & Amid) 153, 158 Ayyubids of Hamah 153,158 Ayyubids of Hims 153,158 100,104 Ayyubids of Mesopotamia 153,158 090 092 Ayyubids of Yemen 153 NC Azerbaijan, Atabegs of (Ildegezids) Azerbaijan, Rawwadids of 122 NC 420,429 Azerbaijan, Sajites of 122,123
Azerbaijan, Sallarids of Dailam and 122 NC Bab al Mandab, Ras Badajoz, Aftasids of (Muluk al Tuwaif) 091 NC Bagdad, Abbasid Caliphs of Bagratids of Georgia Bahawalpur, Khans of Bahmanis of Kulbarga (the Deccan) Bahn Mamlukes Bajranggarh Balban, House of (Bengal Governors) 353, 354 Balkh, sub-dynasty of (Timurids) 276 NC Baluchistan, Khans of Banares (England) 443, 446 Bangka, Island of 469 Nl Banijurids (Abu Daudids) 128, 130 Bannu Ghaniyaof Majorca (Muluk al Tuwaif) 091, 092 Bannu Mujahid of Majorca (Muluk al Tuwaif) 091, 092 Banswara Bantam 456, 469 NI Banu Sumadih of Almeria (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090 092 Bar Pais (Central Asian) Barakzais 304,306 Band Shahis of Bidar (Deccan States) 374 NC Baroda, Gaikwars of Basra, Ottoman Larins struck at Batavia (from 1644) (Netherlands) Batavian Republic (1799 - 1806) (Netherlands) Bawandids of the South Caspian Coastlands Bayramic Village (Countermarked Ottoman) Begtimurids Atabegs of Armenia Bektiginids Atabegs of Arbela Bengal Governors House of Balban 353,354 Bengal in General (England) 443, 446 Bengal under the House of Sulayman Kararani Bengal under the Suns Bengal, Governors of (Period of Iltutmish of Delhi) Bengal, Sultans of 353, 354 Bengal, Sultans of (Habshi Kings) 353 NC Bengal, Sultans of (House of Hosayn Shah) 353, 358 Bengal, Sultans of (House of llyas) 353, 355 Bengal, Sultans of (House of llyas-restored) Bengal, Sultans of (House of Raja Kans) 353 NC Bengal Governor & Rebel Berar, Imad Shahis of (Deccan States) 374 NC Berbers of Maghrawa, Zenata Berbers of Sijilmasa, Miknasa Beys of Alaya (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Beys of Tunis, Hussainid Bhartpur, Jats of 420, 424 Bhonsla Raja of Nagpur, Maratha Bhonsla Rajas, Maratha Bhopal Bidar, Band Shahis of (Deccan States) 374 NC Bijapur Larins Bijapur, Adil Shahis of (Deccan States) Bijawar Bikanir 420,427 Bindraban, Muminabad- (Islamabad-Mathura &) 420, 429 Biths, Sharaf Shahs of (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) 200, 203 Black Sheep, Turcomans of the (Kara Koyunlu) Blue & White Hordes, United Blue Horde of Western Kipchak Bokhara, Abbasid Provincial Coinage 084 NI Bokhara, Mangits of Bokhara, sub dynasty of (Shaybanids) 283 NC Bombay (England) 443, 445 Borneo 456,472 British Sphere in the Hydramout British Sphere in the Hydramout Broach, Nawabs of (Maratha States) 405, 406 Brunei, Sultanate of ~ 456,472 Bulgaria 318 Nl

Bundi 420,430 Burhan of Siwas, Qadi (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO 200, 203 Burids Atabegs of Damascus Burji Mamlukes 198, L98 Buweyhid (Buyids) 122,123 Buyids (Buweyhids) 122,123 Buzurg, Lur (Atabegs of Luristan) (Hazaraspids) Byzantine Coinage, Late (6th Cent AH) 321 NI Byzantine Folies Countermarked (6th Cent AH) Byzantine Folies, Atabeg Countermarks on Byzantine Sealing 478 NI Byzantine Sealing ** **Byzantine. Arab** **Byzantium Early Period 064 NI Caffa in the Crimea, Genoese trading colony Carnatic, The (Nawabs of Arcot) 436, 440 Caspian Coastlands, Bawandids of the South Castile Caucasus, Khans of the 304 NC Caucasus, Khans of the Caucasus, Khans of the Caucasus, Khans of the 304 NC Caucasus, Shirwan Shahs of the** **Caucasus, Shirwan Shahs of the** **Celebes 456,473 Ceylon Ceylon** **Ceylon, Fish hook Larins of Chak, Family of Ghazi Khan (Sultans of Kashmir) Chand Rajas of Garhwal** **Chhatarpur** **Chinese Merchant's Tokens of Southern Malaya 467 N! Christian Dirhems (Crusader) Cilicia during Abbasid-Hamdanid Period** **Cilician Armenia, Rupenid Kingdom in** **Copper Coinage, Afghan Civic** **Copper Coinage, Iranian Civic** **Cordoba (Al Andalus)** **Cordoba, Jahwands of Cordoba, Kings of (Qurtubah) Countermarked Byzantine Folies (6th Cent AH) Countermarked Coins (Ak Koyunlu) Countermarked Coins (Djibouti)** **Countermarked Coins (Kara Koyunlu)** **Countermarked Coins (Mozambique)** **Countermarked Coins (Mutawakkilite Kings)** **Countermarked Coins (Obock) Countermarked Coins (Pemba anonymous coinage) Countermarked Coins (Ras Bab al Mandab) Countermarked Coins (Sultanate of Hejaz) Countermarked Coins (Sultanate of Nejd & Hejaz) Countermarked Coins (Sultanate of Nejd)** **Countermarked Coins (Sultanate of Qa'iti) Countermarked Coins (Timurids) Countermarked Coins (Un-identified Sheikhdoms) Countermarked Ottoman (Bayramic Village) Countermarked Ottoman (Dardanelles) Countermarked Ottoman (Mytilene Island) 213, 214 Countermarked Ottoman (Thasos Island)** **Countermarked Ottoman (Yunda Island)** **Countermarked Ottoman Copper Coinage** **Countermarks on Byzantine Folies, Atabeg** **Crete under Venice 322 Nl Crete, Emirs of Crimea (Khans of the Knm)** **Crimea, Genoese trading colony at Caffa in the** **Crusader Coinage, Islamic Style** **Crusader Christian Dirhems** **Crusader Pseudo Aleppo Series** **Crusader Pseudo Damascus Series** **Crusader Pseudo-Fatimid Series** ** Crusaders Antioch 327 NI
Crusaders Athens Crusaders Cyprus (Venman Period) Crusaders Edessa Crusaders Jerusalem Crusaders Jerusalem & Cyprus Crusaders Tripoli (Early Series) Crusaders Tripoli (Later Series) Crusaders Uncertain Mint Cyprus (Venitian Period) (Crusader) Cyprus, Jerusalem & (Crusaders) Dailam & Azerbaijan, Sallarids of Dalmatia & Albania under Venice Damascus Series, Pseudo (Crusader) Damascus Atabegs of (Bunds) Danishmendids of Malatya Danishmendids of Siwas Darbandid Dynasty (Second Dynasty - Shirwan Shahs) Dardanelles (Countermarked Ottoman) Darfur (Post Ottoman Coin Series) Datia Daudids, Abu (Banijurids) Deccan (Bahmanis of Kulbarga) Deccan States (Adil Shahis of Bijapur) Deccan States (Band Shahis of Bidar) Deccan States (Faruqi Sultans of Khandesh) Deccan States (Imad Shahis of Berar) Deccan States (Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar) Deccan States (Qutb Shahis of Golconda) Deccan, Nizams of the (Nizams of Hyderabad) Delhi Sultanate, Madura as a Province of the Delhi, Period of Iltutmish of (Sultans of Bengal) Delhi, Sultans of Denia, Slave Kings of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Denizli, Amirs of (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Dhar Dhu al Nunids of Toledo (Muluk al Tuwaif) Diu (Portugal) Divngi, Mangujakids of Diyarbakr (Inalids of Amid) Diyarbakr, Ayyubids of (Hisn Keyfa & Amid) Diyarbakr, Marwanids of Djibouti Dogra Rajas of Kashmir Dulafids of Kurdistan Durranis Early Great Khans (Ilak Khans) (Qarakhanids) Edessa (Crusaders) Efshands Egypt & Syria, Fatimids of N Africa Egypt & Syria, Ikhshidids of Egypt (Post Ottoman Coin Series) Egypt, Kings of Elichpur, Local Coinage of (N Deccan) Emirs of Crete England - Banares England - Bengal in General England - Bombay England - Farrukhabad England - Madras England Madras England - Murshidabad England - Murshidabad England Surat England, Early Experimental Issues from (India) England Penang (from 1786) Eretnids (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Erzinjan, Mangujakids of Erzurum, Salduqids of Ethiopia (Sulayhids & Zurayids & Imitations) Ethiopia (Sulayhids & Zurayids & Imitations) Ethiopia (Sulayhids & Zurayids & Imitations) Ethiopia, Kingdom of

# 128 NI

329 Nl 127 NI 327 Nl 329 NI 327 Nl 328 NI 328 NI 329 NI 329 NI

# 122 NC 322 Nl

# I7S *ITi* 41-^

# 128, 130

374 NC 374 NC 374 NC 374, 375 374, 375 090, 092 200 NC 091,092 442,443 153, 158 122, 123 122, 123 304, 305

# 327 NI 289, 297 115, 116 115, 116

443,446 443, 446 443,445 443,447 443,446 443,447 443,446 443, 447 443,445 443,445 200, 203,092

European Imitations of Islamic Coins, Western European, Western (Imitations of Islamic Coins) Fals, Bar (Central Asian) Family of Ghazi Khan Chak (Sultans of Kashmir) Family of Shah Mirza Swati (Sultans of Kashmir) Farrukhabad (England) 443, 447 Pars & Seistan, sub dynasty of (Timurids) 276, 281 Pars, Atabegs of (Salghurids) Faruqi Sultans of Khandesh (Deccan States) 374 NC Fatimid Glass Weights Fatimid Series, Pseudo (Crusader) Fatimids of N Africa, Egypt & Syria 115, 116 Ferghana, sub dynasty of Uzkand & (Timurids) 276 NC Filali Sharifs of Morocco 219,223 Fish-hook Larins of Ceylon ' Folies Atabeg Countermarks on Byzantine France - Mahe 442, 444 France Mazulipatam 442,444 France Murshidabad 442, 444 France Pondicherry 442, 444 Gaikwars of Baroda Ganja, Khans of ** **Garhwal, Chand Rajas of** **Genoese trading colony at Caffa in the Crimea** **Georgia, Bagratids of** **Georgia Kingdom of Ghaniya of Ma\|orca, Bannu (Muluk al TuwaiO Ghazi Khan Chak, Family of (Sultans of Kashmir) Ghazi of Kashgar, Atalik Ghaznavid coinage of N Afghanistan, Samanid 128, Ghaznavids 128, Ghazni, Amirate of** **Ghonds** **Ghonds** **Ghons (Sultans of Malwa)** **Ghurfah, Sultanate of** **Glass Weights, Fatimid Golconda, Qutb Shahis of (Deccan States) 374, 375 Golden Horde, Khans of the Governor & Rebel of Bengal** **Governors of Bengal Period of Iltutmish of Delhi Governors, Bengal (House of Balban) 353, 354 Gowa, Mangkasara (Sultanate of Macassar) 456, 473 Granada, Nasrids of 100, 103 Granada, Zinds of (Muluk al TuwaiO 090, 091 Great Khans in the East (Ilak Khans) (Qarakhanids) 162 NC Great Khans, Early (Ilak Khans) (Qarakhanids) Great Khans, Mongol 239, 240 Great Seljuqs Gujarat, Sultans of Gwalior, Sindhias of** **Habshi Kings (Sultans of Bengal) 353 NC Hafsids of Tunis 099,103 Hamah, Ayyubids of 153, 158 Haindanid Period, Cilicia during Abbasid- Hamdanids 122, 123 Hamid (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) 200, 202 Hammudids of Algeciras (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090 NC Hammudids of Malaga (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090, 091 Harar, Sultanate of Hasani Sharifs of Morocco, Sa'dians** **Hazaraspids Atabegs of Luristan (Lur Buzurg)** ** Hejaz, Sultanate of 231,232 Hejaz Sultanate of Nejd+ 231,233 Hephthalites, Turco 063 NI Herat, Kerts of Hilla, Mazyadids of 122 NC Hims, Ayyubids of 153,158 Hisn Keyfa *&* Amid (Ayyubids of Diyarbakr) 153, 158 Hisn Keyfa & Amid Urtukids of ** **Holkars of Indore** ** Horde in Eastern Kipchak, White 245 NC
Horde of Western Kipchak, Blue Horde, Khans of the Golden Hordes, United Blue & White Hormuz, Kings of (Struck Larins) Hosayn Shah, House of (Sultans of Bengal) House of Balban (Bengal Governors) House of Hosayn Shah (Sultans of Bengal) House of Ilyas (Sultans of Bengal) House of Ilyas restored (Sultans of Bengal) House of Raja Kans (Sultans of Bengal) House of Saladin (Ayyubid) House of Sephadin (Ayyubid) House of Sulayman Kararani, Bengal under the Hudids of Saragossa (Muluk al Tuwaif) Hungary Hussaimd Beys of Tunis Hyderabad, Nizams of Hydramout, British Sphere in the Idrisids of Morocco Ikhshidids of Egypt & Syria llak Khans (Great Khans in the East) llak Khans (Qarakhanids) (Early Great Khans) llak Khans (Western Khanate) (Qarakhanids) Ildegezids Atabegs of Azerbaijan Ilkhans Mongols of Persia Iltutmish of Delhi, Period of (Sultans of Bengal) Ilyas, House of (Sultans of Bengal) Ilyas-restored, House of (Sultans of Bengal) Imad Shahis of Berar (Deccan States) Imams of Sa'da, Rassid Imams of Sa'da, Rassid Imams of San'a Imams of San'a as Ottoman Vassals Imams of the Yemen, Rasulid Imitations of Islamic Coins, Western European Imitations of Islamic Coins, Western European Imitations, Sulayhids & Zurayids & (Ethiopia) Inalids of Amid (Diyarbakr) India Early Experimental Issues from England Indonesia, Malaya (Pre Islamic) Indonesian Sultanates, Iron Currency of NE Indore, Holkars of Injuids of South western Iran Iran, Injuids of South-western Iranian - Afghan Plateau, Seals Iranian Civic Copper Coinage Iraq, Seljuqs of Iron Currency of NE Indonesian Sultanates Isfendiands (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Islamabad-Mathura & Muminabad Bindraban Islamic Coins, Imitations of (Western European) Islamic Coins, Western European Imitations of Islamic Seals & Sealings Islamic Style Crusader Coinage Ispahbads Jagatai of Transoxiana Jagatai Provincial Khans Jahwands of Cordoba (Muluk al TuwaiO Jaipur Jaisalmir Jala, Patani Jalairids Janids of Astrakhan Jaora Jats of Bhartpur Java Jerusalem & Cyprus (Crusaders) ^ Jerusalem (Crusaders) Jhalawar Jibal, sub-dynasty of (Timurids) Jind Jodhpur

# 24'; 353, 358 353, 354 353, 358 353, 355 353 NC

# 091,092 317NI

# 115,116 162 NC 162, 163 353,355 374 NC

# 227 NC 227, 229 227,228

# 443, 445 458 NI 160, 161 200, 202 420, 429

# 090 NC

420,421 420,421 462 NI 420, 424 329 NI 327 NI 420,431 276 NI 420, 425

Johore Juanpur, Sultans of Junagadh Kabul & Kandahar, sub-dynasty of (Timurids) Kajars Kakweyhids of Kurdistan Kalyan (Maratha States) Kandahar, sub dynasty of Kabul & (Timurids) Kans, House of Raja (Sultans of Bengal) Kara Koyunlu Turcomans of the Black Sheep Karaman (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Kararani, Bengal under the House of Sulayman Kashgar, Atalik Ghazi of Kashmir, Dogra Rajas of Kashmir, Sultans of Kashmir, Sultans of (Family of Ghazi Khan Chak) Kashmir, Sultans of (Family of Shah Mirza Swati) Kashmir, Sultans of (Moghul Conqueror) Kathiawar, Kutch and Kedah Kelantan Kelantan - Patani Kermian of Kutahia (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Kerts of Herat Kesranid Dynasty (First Dynasty - Shirwan Shahs) Keyfa & Amid, Urtukids of Hisn Keyfa, Amid & Hisn (Ayyubids of Diyarbakr) Khaljis Khaljis (Sultans of Malwa) Khan Chak, Family of Ghazi (Sultans of Kashmir) Khanate, Western (llak Khans) (Qarakhanids) Khandesh, Faruqi Sultans of (Deccan States) Khans in the East, Great (llak Khans) (Qarakhanids) Khans of Bahawalpur Khans of Baluchistan Khans of Ganja Khans of Khiva Khans of Khokand Khans of Kirman, Kutlugh Khans of Qarabagh Khans of Shamakhi (Shirwan Shahs) Khans of Sheki (Nukha) Khans of the Caucasus Khans of the Golden Horde Khans of the Knm (the Crimea) Khans, Early Great (llak Khans) (Qarakhanids) Khans, Jagatai Provincial Khans, Mongol Great Khans, Period of the Rival Khans, Rival (Ilkhans - 3rd Period) Khaqanid Shahs of Shirwan (Shirwan Shahs) Khedives Khiva, Khans of Khokand, Khans of Khorasan, Sarbcdands of Khorasan, sub-dynasty of (Timurids) Khwarezm Shahs Kilwa-Mafia, Sultanate of Kingdom of Ethiopia Kingdom of Georgia Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Kingdom of Trebizond Kingdom of Zabul Kings of Ahar Kings of Awadh Kings of Cordoba (Qurtubah) Kings of Denia, Slave (Muluk al Tuwaif) Kings of Egypt Kings of Hormuz (Struck Larins) Kings of Majorca (Muluk al Tuwaif) Kings of Murcia Kings of Murcia 457, 459 276, 282 289, 298

# 122, 126

405, 406 276, 282 353 NC 200, 201 376, 377 457, 459 457, 462 200, 202 153, 158

# 162, 163 374 NC

# 162 NC 283, 285 304 NC 304 NC 239, 240 248, 257 248, 257 283, 285 276, 282

# 231,233 323 NI 063 NI

# 090, 092 091 NC

# 100 NC 098 NC
Kings of Nimruz (Late Saffands) Kings of Nimruz (Later Saffands of Seistan) Kings of the Yemen, Mutawakkilite Kings of Valencia Kings of Valencia Kings, Habshi (Sultans of Bengal) Kings, Slave King Kipchak, Blue Horde of Western Kipchak, Rival Families in Western Kipchak, White Horde in Eastern Kirman, Kutlugh Khans of Kishangarh Kotah Kotla, Maler Koyunlu, Ak (Turcomans of the White Sheep) Koyunlu, Kara (Turcomans of the Black Sheep) Knm, Khans of the (the Crimea) Kuchawan Kulbarga, Bahmanis of (the Deccan) Kurdistan, Dulafids of Kurdistan Kakweyhids of Kurraman, Shahs of Kutahia, Kermian of (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Kutch & Kdthiawar Kutch Bhu\| (Kutch) Kutch Kutch Bhuj Kutlugh Khans of Kirman Laccadive Islands Ladakh Larins Larins of Ceylon, Fish-hook Larins struck at Basra, Ottoman Larins struck by the Kings of Hormuz Larins struck by the Sefavids, Persian Larins struck by Uncertain Sefavid Shahs Larins, Bijapur Larins, Imitation Persian Larins, Later Arabian Larins, Maldive Island Later Saffands of Seistan (Kings of Nimruz) Ligeh, Patani (Ligor) Ligor (Patani Ligeh) Lodis Lur Buzurg Atabegs of Luristan (Hazaraspids) Luristan, Atabegs of (Lur Buzurg) (Hazaraspids) Macassar, Sultanate of (Mangkasara Gowa) Madras (England) Madras (England) Madura as a Province of the Delhi Sultanate Madura, Sultans of Mafia, Sultanate of Kilwa Maghrawa, Zenata Berbers of Mahe (France) Majopahit, Emblem Currency of Majorca, Bannu Ghaniya of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Majorca, Bannu Mujahid of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Majorca, Kings of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Malacca (1511 1641) (Portugal) Malacca (1511 1641. (Portugal)  Malacca, Sultans of Malaga, Hammudids of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Malatya, Danishmendids of Malay Peninsula after circa AD 1750 Malay Peninsula Circa AD 1500-1750 Malaya - Indonesia (Pre-Islamic) Malaya, Chinese Merchant s Tokens of Southern Maldive Island Larins Maldive Islands Maler Kotla Malwa & Environs, Maratha Confederate Coinage of Malwa & Environs, Maratha Kingdoms in Western Malwa, Sultans of (Ghons) 128, 152

# 100 NC

353 NC 332 333 242 244 245 NC 420, 429 420 431 420, 428 122, 123 122, 126 200, 202 128, 152

# 456 473

443 446 443, 447 442,444 458 NI 091 092 091,092 091 NC 471 NC 457, 458 090,091

# 458 NI 467 NI

Malwa, Sultans of (Khaljis) Mamlukes, Bahn Mamlukes, Burji Mandab, Ras Bab al Mangits of Bokhara Mangkasara Gowa (Sultanate of Macassar) Mangujakids of Divngi Mangujakids of Erzinjan Maratha Bhonsla Raja of Nagpur Maratha Bhonsla Rajas Maratha Confederate Coinage of Malwa & Environs Maratha Conquests North of the River Jumna Maratha Kingdoms in Western Malwa & Environs Maratha Sovereigns Maratha States (Kalyan) Maratha States (Nawabs of Ahmadabad) Maratha States (Nawabs of Broach) Maratha States (Nawabs of Sural) Maratha States (Nipani) Maratha States (Poona, the seat of the Peshwa) Marathas of Satara Marathas of Tanjore Mardin Urtukids of Marinids of Morocco Marwanids of Diyarbakr Mataram Mathura, Islamabad- (& Muminabad-Bindraban) Mazulipatam (France) Mazyadids of Hilla Menteshid (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Merchant's Tokens, Chinese (Southern Malaya) Mesopotamia Ayyubids of Mewar Udaipur Miknasa Berbers of Sijilmasa Mirdasids of Aleppo Mirs of Sind Talpur Mirza Swati Family of Shah (Sultans of Kashmir) Mogadishu, Sultanate of Moghul Conqueror (Sultans of Kashmir) Moghul Empire Mo\]aisk Moldavia Mombasa Mongol Great Khans Mongols of Persia (llkhans) Morocco, Marinids of Morocco, Filali Sharifs of Morocco, Hasani Sharifs of (Sa'dians) Morocco, Idrisids of Morocco Wattasids of Moscow Mosul Oqaylids of Mosul, Zangids of Mosul, Zangids of Mozambique Mujahid of Majorca Bannu (Muluk al Tuwaif) Muluk al Tuwaif (Abbadids of Seville) Muluk al Tuwaif (Aftasids of Badajoz) Muluk al Tuwaif (Amirids of Valencia) Muluk al Tuwaif (Bannu Ghaniya of Majorca) Muluk al Tuwaif (Bannu Mujahid of Majorca) Muluk al Tuwaif (Banu Sumadih of Almeria) Muluk al Tuwaif (Dhu al Nunids of Toledo) Muluk al Tuwaif (Hammudids of Algeciras) Muluk al Tuwaif (Hammudids of Malaga) Muluk al Tuwaif (Hudids of Saragossa) Muluk al Tuwaif (Jahwands of Cordoba) Muluk al Tuwaif (Kings of Denia) Muluk al Tuwaif (Kings of Majorca) Muluk al Tuwaif (Reyes Taifas) Muluk al Tuwaif (Slave Kings of Denia) Muluk al Tuwaif (Tujibids of Saragossa) 198, 198 456, 473

405, 406 405, 406 405 406 405, 406 405, 406 405, 406 100, 106 122, 123 456, 470 420, 429 442,444

# I22NC 200, 202 467 NI 153, 158 420, 425

# I22NC 376, 377 319 NI 3I8NI 239, 240 100, 106 219,223

# 100, 111 319NI

# 122 NC

091,092 090 NC 091 NC 090 NC 091,092 091,092 090, 092 091,092 090 NC 090,091 091,092 090 NC 091 NC 090, 092 090 NC
Muluk al Tuwaif (Zinds of Granada) Muluk al Tuwaif, Turkish Muminabad Bindraban, Islamabad Mathura & Murcia, Kings of Murcia, Kings of Murshidabad (England) Murshidabad (England) Murshidabad (France) Muscat & Oman, Sultanate of Mutawakkilite Kings of the Yemen Muwahhids Muzaffarids Mysore Islamic Period Mysore Return of Hinduism Mytilene Island (Countermarked Ottoman) Nabha Nagpur, Maratha Bhonsla Raja of Namo Currency of Srivijaya Narayan Pett, Rajas of Narwar Nasrids of Granada Nawabs of Ahmadabad (Maratha States) Nawabs of Arcot (the Carnatic) Nawabs of Broach (Maratha States) Nawabs of Surat (Maratha States) Nawanagar Nehavend, Atabegs of Nejd + Hejaz, Sultanate of Nejd, Sultanate of Nejd, Wahabis (Al Saud) of Netherlands Batavia (from 1644) Netherlands Batavian Republic (1799 1806.  Nimruz, Kings of (Late Saffands) Nimruz, Kings of (Later Saffarids of Seistan) Nipani (Maratha States) Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar (Deccan States) Nizams of Hyderabad Nizams of the Deccan (Nizams of Hyderabad) Nizhny-Novgorod, SuzdalNormans in the South Mediterranean Novgorod Novgorod Novgorod, Suzdal NizhnyNukha (Khans of Sheki) Nunids of Toledo, Dhu al (Muluk al Tuwaif) Obock Oman & Zanzibar, Al Bu-Sa'id of Oman & Zanzibar Sayyid Sultans of Oman, Sultanate of Muscat and Omayyad Coinage, Reformed Omayyads of Spain Oqaylids of Mosul Orchha Orthodox Caliphs Ostrogoths Othmanhs (Ottoman Turks) Ottoman Civic Sealings Ottoman Coin Series, Post Ottoman Coin Series, Post (Algeria) Ottoman Coin Series, Post (Darfur) Ottoman Coin Series, Post (Egypt) Ottoman Coin Series, Post (Sudan) Ottoman Coin Series, Post (Tunesia) Ottoman Copper Coinage (Countermarked) Ottoman Larins struck at Basra Ottoman Turks (Othmanhs) Ottoman Vassals, Imams of San a as Ottoman, Countermarked (Bayramic Village) Ottoman, Countermarked (Dardanelles) Ottoman Countermarked (Mytilene Island) Ottoman, Countermarked (Thasos Island) Ottoman, Countermarked (Yunda Island) 090,091

# 420, 429 098 NC

# 100 NC

443, 447 443, 446 442, 444 233, 234 099, 101 450, 452 213,214 458 Nl 100, 103 436, 440 405, 406 405, 406 231,233 231,232 128, 152 405, 406 374, 375

# 3I9N1 3I9N1 304 NC 091,092 233 NC 233, 234 055, 059

# 122 NC 055 NC 067 NI 213,214

Pahang Pahlavis Palembang Partabgarh Patalung Patani Patani Jala Patani Ligeh (Ligor) Patani Saibun Patani, Kelantan Patiala in the Punjab Pemba (anonymous coinage) Pemba, Sultanate of Zanzibar and Penang (from 1786) (England) Perak Period of the Rival Khans Persia, Mongols of (llkhans) Persian Larins struck by the Sefavids Persian Larins, Imitation Peshwa, Poona-the seat of the (Maratha States) Peshwas Pett, Rajas of Narayan Pondicherry (France) Pontianak Poona the seat of the Peshwa (Maratha States) Porbander Port Al Rahman Portugal Portugal - Dm Portugal Malacca (1511 1641.  Portugal Malacca (1511 1641.  Post Ottoman Coin Series Algeria Post Ottoman Coin Series Darfur Post Ottoman Coin Series Egypt Post Ottoman Coin Series Sudan Post Ottoman Coin Series Tunesia Punjab, Patiala in the Qa'iti, Sultanate of Qadi Burhan of Siwas (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Qara Qoyunlu Qarabagh, Khans of Qarakhanids (llak Khans) (Early Great Khans) Qarakhanids (llak Khans) (Western Khanate) Qizil Ahmadly (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Qoyunlu, Qara Qurtubah (Kings of Cordoba) Qutb Shahis of Golconda (Deccan States) Radhanpur Rahman, Port Al Raja Kans, House of (Sultans of Bengal) Raja of Nagpur, Maratha Bhonsla Rajas of Garhwal, Chand Rajas of Kashmir, Dogra Rajas of Narayan Pett Rajas of Wanparti Rajas, Maratha Bhonsla Rajputana, States of Ras Bab al Mandab Rassid Imams of Sa'da Rassid Imams of Sa da Rasulid Imams of the Yemen Ratlam Ravishnagar Saugor (Saugor) Rawwadids of Azerbaijan Rebel of Bengal, Governor and Rebel, Saffand Revolt, Afghan Rewah Reyes Taifas (Muluk al Tuwail) Rhodes, Island of Riazan Rival Families in Western Kipchak

# 457, 466

289, 301 456, 469 420, 432 460 Nl 462 NI 233, 234 457 NC 248, 257 405, 406 442,444 405,406

# 113NI 442,443 471 NI 200, 203 304 NC

# 162, 163 374, 375 353 NC

# 227 NC 227,228

# 122 NC

# 289, 296 420, 433 3I9NI 242, 244
Rival Families, Second Period of Rival Khans Period of the 248, 257 Rum, Seljuqs of Rupenid Kingdom in Cilician Armenia Russian Pnncipalities, Early Coinage of the "ilQ NI Sa'da, Rassid Imams of Sa'da, Rassid Imams of 227 NC Sa'dians Hasani Sharifs of Morocco Saffand Rebel Saffands 128 129 Saffands of Seistan, Later (Kings of Nimruz) 128 152 Saffands, Late (Kings of Nimruz) Saibun, Patani Sajites of Azerbaijan 122, 123 Saladin, House of (Ayyubid) Salduqids of Erzurum Salghurids Atabegs of Pars Sallarids of Dailam & Azerbaijan 122 NC Samadih of Almeria, Banu (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090 092 Samanid Period, Sweden & Afghanistan during Viking Samanid Ghaznavid coinage of N Afghanistan 128 145 Samanids 128, 132 Samarkand, sub dynasty of (Shaybanids) 283 NC San'a as Ottoman Vassals, Imams of San'a, Imams of 227 229 Saragossa.Hudids of (Muluk al Tuwaif) 091 092 Saragossa, Tujibids of (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090 NC Sarbedands of Khorasan Saruhan (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) 200, 201 Sassanian, Arab- Satara, Marathas of 405, 406 Saud, Al (Wahabis of Nejd) Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of 231, 233 Saugor Ravishnagar Saugor Sayyid Sultans of Oman & Zanzibar 233 NC Sayyids Sealing, Byzantine 478 NI Sealing, Byzantine Sealings Islamic Seals and Sealings, Ottoman Civic Seals & Sealings, Islamic Seals Iranian Afghan Plateau Second Period of Rival Families Sefavid Shahs, Larins struck by Uncertain Sefavids Sefavids, Persian Larins struck by the Seistan, Abbasid Provincial Coinage Seistan, Later Saffands of (Kings of Nimruz) 128, 152 Seistan, sub-dynasty of Fars & (Timurids) 276, 281 Seljuqs of Iraq 160,161 Seljuqs of Rum Seljuqs of Syria 160,161 Seljuqs, Great Sephadin, House of (Ayyubid) Serbia 318 NI Seville, Abbadids of (Muluk al TuwaiO 090 NC Shah Mirza Swati, Family of (Sultans of Kashmir) Shah, House of Hosayn (Sultans of Bengal) 353, 358 Shahis of Ahmadnagar, Nizam (Deccan States) 374, 375 Shahis of Berar, Imad (Deccan States) 374 NC Shahis of Bidar Band (Deccan States) 374 NC Shahis of Bijapur, Adil (Deccan States) Shahis of Golconda, Qutb (Deccan States) 374, 375 Shahpura 420,432 Shahs of Biths, Sharaf (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) 200, 203 Shahs of Kunaman Shahs of Shirwan, Khaqanid (Shirwan Shahs) Shahs of the Caucasus, Shirwan Shahs of the Caucasus, Shirwan Shahs, Khwarezm Shahs, Larins struck by Uncertain Sefavid Shahs, Shirwan (Kesranid Dynasty - First Dynasty)

Shahs, Shirwan (Khans of Shamakhi) Shahs, Shirwan, (Darbandid Dynasty Second Dynasty) Shamakhi Khans of (Shirwan Shahs) Sharaf Shahs of Bitlis (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) 200, 203 Sharifs of Morocco Filali 219,223 Sharifs of Morocco, Hasani (Sadians) Shaybanids of Transoxiana Shaybanids sub dynasty of Bokhara 283 NC Shaybanids sub dynasty of Samarkand 283 NC Sheep, Turcomans of the Black (Kara Koyunlu) Sheep Turcomans of the White (Ak Koyunlu) Sheki, Khans of (Nukha) 304 NC Shirwan Shahs (Darbandid Dynasty - Second Dynasty) Shirwan Shahs (Kesranid Dynasty First Dynasty) Shirwan Shahs (Khans of Shamakhi) ' Shirwan Shahs (Khaqanid Shahs of Shirwan) Shirwan Shahs of the Caucasus Shirwan Shahs of the Caucasus Shirwan, Khaqanid Shahs of (Shirwan Shahs) Si\]ilmasa, Miknasa Berbers of Sikhs 311,312 Simjund (Local issues of NE Afghanistan) 128,145 Sind, Amirs of Sind, Talpur Mirs of Sindhias of Gwalior Singgora Sinjar, Zangids of Siwas, Danishmendids of Siwas, Qadi Burhan of (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO 200, 203 Slave Kings 332, 333 Slave Kings of Denia (Muluk al Tuwaif) 090, 092 Southern Malaya Chinese Merchant s Tokens 467 NI Spain, Omayyads of Spain, United II3NI Srivijaya, Namo Currency of 458 NI States of Rajputana Sudan (Post Ottoman Coin Series) Sulayhids (Ethiopia) Sulayhids of the Yemen Sulayman Kararani, Bengal under the House of Sultanate of Brunei 456, 472 Sultanate of Ghurtah Sultanate of Harar Sultanate of Hejaz 231,232 Sultanate of Kilwa Mafia Sultanate of Macassar (Mangkasara Gowa) 456, 473 Sultanate of Mogadishu Sultanate of Muscat & Oman 233, 234 Sultanate of Nejd 231,232 Sultanate of Nejd + Hejaz 231, 233 Sultanate of Qa iti Sultanate of Tanm Sultanate of Zanzibar 225 NC Sultanate of Zanzibar & Pemba 233, 234 Sultanate, Atchih 455, 468 Sultanate, Madura as a Province of the Delhi Sultanates, Iron Currency of NE Indonesian Sultans of Bengal 353, 354 Sultans of Bengal Habshi Kings 353 NC Sultans of Bengal House of Hosayn Shah 353, 358 Sultans of Bengal House of Ilyas 353,355 Sultans of Bengal House of Ilyas (restored) Sultans of Bengal House of Raja Kans 353 NC Sultans of Delhi Sultans of Gujarat Sultans of Juanpur Sultans of Kashmir Sultans of Kashmir - Family of Ghazi Khan Chak Sultans of Kashmir - Family of Shah Mirza Swati Sultans of Kashnur Moghul Conqueror 376, 377 Sultans of Khandesh, Faruqi (Deccan States) 374 NC Sultans of Madura
Sultans of Malacca Sultans of Malwa Ghoris Sultans of Malwa Khaljis Sultans of Oman & Zanzibar, Sayyid Sumadih of Almeria, Banu (Muluk al Tuwaif) Sumatra Circa AD 1500- 1875 Surat (England) Surat, Nawabs of (Maratha States) Suns (Afghans) Suns, Bengal under the Suzdal-Nizhny Novgorod Swati, Family of Shah Mirza (Sultans of Kashmir) Sweden & Afghanistan during Viking-Samanid Period Syria, Fatimids of N Africa, Egypt & Syria, Ikhshidids of Egypt and Syria, Seljuqs of Tabanstan, Abbasid Governors of Tahinds Tahinds of the Yemen Taifas Almoravids Taifas, Reyes (Muluk al Tuwaif) TalpurMirs of Sind Tanjore, Marathas of Tarim, Sultanate of Ternate Thasos Island (Countermarked Ottoman) Tidore Timurids Timurids sub-dynasty of Balkh Timurids sub-dynasty of Pars & Seistan Timurids sub-dynasty of Jibal Timurids sub-dynasty of Kabul & Kandahar Timurids sub-dynasty of Khorasan Timurids sub-dynasty of Uzkand & Ferghana TTlemcen & W Algeria, Ziyanids of Tokens, Chinese Merchant's (Southern Malaya) Toledo, Dhu al Nunids of (Muluk al Tuwaif) Tonk Transoxiana, Jagatai of Transoxiana, Shaybanids of Trebizond, Kingdom of Trengganu (1500-1750 AD) Trengganu (after 1750 AD) Tripoli (Crusaders)(Early Series) Tripoli (Crusaders)(Late Series) Tughluqs Tujibids of Saragossa (Muluk al Tuwaif) Tulunids Tunesia (Post Ottoman Coin Series) Tunis, Hafsids of Tunis, Hussainid Beys of Turco-Hephthalites Turcomans of the Black Sheep (Kara Koyunlu) Turcomans of the White Sheep (Ak Koyunlu) Turkish Muluk al Tuwait Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Aidin) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Amirs of Denizli) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Beys of Alaya) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Eretnids) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Hamid) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Isfendiarids) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Karaman) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Kermian of Kutahia) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Menteshid) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Qadi Burhan of Siwas) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Qizil Ahmadly) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Saruhan) Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif (Sharaf Shahs of Bitlis) Turks, Ottoman (Othmanlis) Tuwaif, Muluk al (Reyes Taifa.s) Tuwaif, Turkish Muluk al Tver

# 457, 458 233 NC 090, 092 443,445 405, 406

# 115,116

115,116 160, 161 081,082 227 NC 456 NC 456 NC 276 NC 276,281 276 NC 276, 282 276, 282 276 NC

# 100, 104

467 NI 091,092 420, 428 323 NI 457, 459 457,465 327 NI 328 NI 090 NC 086, 087 099, 103 063 NI

# 200,201

200 NC 200, 203 200, 202 200, 202 200,201 200, 202 200, 202 200, 203 200, 201 200, 203

# 3I9NI

Tver Udaipur, Mewar United Blue & White Hordes United Spain Urtukids of Hisn Keyfa & Amid Urtukids of Maridin Uzkand & Ferghana, sub-dynasty of (Timurids) Valencia, Amirids of (Muluk al TuwaiO Valencia, Kings of Valencia, Kings of Venice, Crete under Venice, Dalmatia & Albania under Venitian Coinage Venitian Period, Cyprus- (Crusader) Viking-Samanid Period, Sweden & Afghanistan during Wahabis(AISaud)ofNejd Wahd Wanparti, Rajas of Wattasids of Morocco Weights, Fatimid Glass Western Khanate (llak Khans) (Qarakhanids) White Horde in Eastern Kipchak White Hordes, United Blue and White Sheep, Turcomans of the (Ak Koyunlu) Yemen, Ayyubids of Yemen, Mutawakkilite Kings of the Yemen, Rasulid Imams of the Yemen, Sulayhids of the Yemen, Tahinds of the Yemen, Zurayids of the Yuan Dynasty Yunda Island (Countermarked Ottoman) Zabul, Kingdom of Zands Zangids of Al Jezirah Zangids of Aleppo Zangids of Mosul Zangids of Mosul Zangids of Sinjar Zanzibar & Pemba, Sultanate of Zanzibar, Al Bu-Said of Oman and Zanzibar, Sayyid Sultans of Oman and Zanzibar, Sultanate of Zenata Berbers of Maghrawa Zinds Zinds of Granada (Muluk al Tuwaif) Ziyanids of TTlemcen & W Algeria Ziyands Zurayids (Ethiopia) Zurayids of the Yemen

# 319NI 420, 425

# I13NI 276 NC 090 NC

# 100 NC 322 NI 322 NI 322 NI 329 NI 274, 275

# 100, 111 162, 163 245 NC

# 153 NC 227,228

# 227 NC

# 239, 241 NI 063 NI 289, 298

# 233, 234 233 NC 225 NC 093, 095 090,091 100, 104 128, 130
## Part II: Dynasty Index (Modified from Bosworth )

**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Abbadids of Seville (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Abbasid Caliphs Abbasid Caliphs Abbasid Copper Coinage Cilicia Acheh (Sultans) Acheh (Sultans) Adil Shahis Afghan Civic Copper Afsharids Aftasids of Badajoz (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Aghlabids Ahom Kingdom of Assam Al Bu Sa'id Al Bu Sa'id m East Africa Al Bu Sa'id in East Africa Al Bu Sa'id Oman AlBu Sa'id United Al Su'ud Al Su'ud Al Su'ud Al Su'ud Al Su'ud Alawid Sharifs Algeria Post Ottoman Coin Series Almohads Almohads Almoravids Alwar Amir of Astarabad (Walid) Amirids of Valencia (Muluk al Tawa'if) Amirs of Crete Aq Qoyunlu Arab-Byzantine Arab-Sasanian Eastern Sistan Series Arab-Sasanian Main Series Arab-Sasanian Tabanstan Series Artuqids Line in Hisn Kayfa & Amid Artuqids Line in Mardin & Mayyafariqin Atabegs of Nehavend Atalik Ghazi of Kashgar Aydin Oghullan Ayyubids Ayyubids Ayyubids Ayyubids Line in Diyar Bakr (Hisn Kayfa ) Ayyubids Line in Diyar Bakr (Mayyafariqin ) Ayyubids Line m Hamat Ayyubids Line in Hims Ayyubids Line m Yemen Bahawalpur, Khans of Bahmanids Bajranggarh Baluchistan, Khans of Banijurids Banswara Band Shahis Bawandid Ispahbadhs Begtiginids Bengal (Governors) Balban's Line Bengal (Governors) Period of Iltutmish of Delhi Bengal (Governors) Period of Iltutmish of Delhi Bengal (Sultans) Bengal (Sultans) Habashis Bengal (Sultans) Kararanis Bengal (Sultans) Line of Ilyas Shah Bengal (Sultans) Line of Ilyas Shah Restored Bengal (Sultans) Line of Raja Ganesa Bengal (Sultans) Line of Sayyid Husayn Shah Bengal (Sultans) Suns

Page in Mit. 090 NC 45 5, 468 289. 297  091 NC 093, 095 233, 234 233, 234 233 NC 231,233 231.232 231,232 231,233 219,223

# 099, 101 420, 429 274 275 090 NC

# US 081,082 200,201

# 153, 158 153,158 153, 158 153, 158 153 NC

# 128, 130

374 NC 353, 354 353, 354 353 NC 353,355 353 NC 353, 358

**Mitchiner Listing** Abbadids of Seville (Muluk al Tuwaif) Abbasid Caliphs of Bagdad Abbasids. Later Cilicia during Abbasid Hamdanid Period Atchih Sultanate Sumatra Circa AD 1500- 1875 Adil Shahis of Bijapur (Deccan States) Afghan Civic Copper Coinage Efsharids Aftasids of Badajoz (Muluk al Tuwaif) Aghlabids Ahom Kingdom of Assam Al Bu Sa'id of Oman & Zanzibar Pemba (anonymous coinage) Sultanate of Zanzibar & Pemba Sultanate of Muscat & Oman Sayyid Sultans of Oman & Zanzibar Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Sultanate of Hejaz Sultanate of Ne\|d Sultanate of Nejd 4- Hejaz Wahabis (Al Saud) of Nejd Filali Sharifs of Morocco Post Ottoman Coin Series Algeria Imitations of Islamic Coins, Western European Muwahhids Almoravids Alwar Wahd Amirids of Valencia (Muluk al TuwaiO Emirs of Crete Ak Koyunlu Turcomans of the White Sheep Arab-Byzantine Abbasid Provincial Coinage Seistan Arab Sassanian Abbasid Governors of Tabanstan Urtukids of Hisn Keyfa & Amid Urtukids of Mardin Atabegs of Nehavend Atalik Ghazi of Kashgar Aidin (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Ayyubids House of Saladin (Ayyubid) House of Sephadin (Ayyubid) Ayyubids of Diyarbakr (Hisn Keyfa & Amid) Ayyubids of Mesopotamia Ayyubids of Hamah Ayyubids of Hims Ayyubids of Yemen Khans of Bahawalpur Bahmanis of Kulbarga (the Deccan) Bajranggarh Khans of Baluchistan Banijurids (Abu Daudids) Banswara Band Shahis of Bidar (Deccan States) Bawandids of the South Caspian Coastlands Bektiginids Atabegs of Arbela Bengal Governors House of Balban Bengal Governor & Rebel Governors of Bengal Period of Iltutmish of Delhi Sultans of Bengal Sultans of Bengal Habshi Kings Bengal under the House of Sulayman Kararani Sultans of Bengal House of Ilyas Sultans of Bengal House of Ilyas (restored) Sultans of Bengal House of Raja Kans Sultans of Bengal House of Hosayn Shah Bengal under the Suns
**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Beys of Alanya Bhopal Bijawar Bikanir Bonds British British British British British British British British British British British British British British Brunei (Sultans) Brunei (Sultans) Bundi Buyids Byzantine Countermark Caffa Chaghatayids Chaghatayids Chand Rajas of Garhwal Chhatarpur Cordova Almoravid Almohad Period (Muluk al-Tawaif) Countermarked Byzantine Coins Countermarked Byzantine Coins Countermarked Byzantine Coins Crusader Crusader Crusader Crusader Crusader Dabuyid Ispahbadhs Danishmendids Danishmendids Darfur Post Ottoman Coin Series Datia Delhi (Sultans) Delhi (Sultans) Delhi (Sultans) Delhi (Sultans) Khaljis Delhi (Sultans) Lodis Delhi (Sultans) Mu'izzi or Shamsi Slave Kings Delhi (Sultans) Sayyids Delhi (Sultans) Suns Delhi (Sultans) Tughluqids Dhar Dhu '1-Nunids of Toledo (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Djibouti Dogra Rajas of Kashmir Dulafids Durrani Durrani (Barakzays) Dutch Dutch Dutch Egypt House of Muhammad 'Ah Egypt House of Muhammad 'Ah Egypt House of Muhammad 'Ah Elichpur Eretna Oghullari Ethiopia Fals, Bar Faruqi Rulers of Khandesh Fatimids Page **in Mil.** 420, 427 443,

443, 443, 443, 443, 443, 443, 443, 443, 443, 456, 456, 472 420, 122, 091, 122, 304, 305 304, 306

# 374 NC

**Mitchiner Listing** Beys of Alaya (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Bhopal Bijawar Bikanir Burids Atabegs of Damascus Banares (England) Bengal in General (England) Bombay (England) British Sphere in the Hydramout Ceylon England Penang (from 1786) Farrukhabad (England) India Early Experimental Issues from England Madras (England) Madras (England) Mombasa Murshidabad (England) Murshidabad (England) Surat (England) Borneo Sultanate of Brunei Bundi Buyids (Buweyhids) Rhodes, Island of Genoese trading colony at Caffa in the Crimea Jagatai of Transoxiana Jagatai Provincial Khans Chand Ra\]as of Garhwal Chhatarpur Kings of Cordoba (Qurtubah) Atabeg Countermarks on Byzantine Folies Byzantine Folies Countermarked (6th Cent AH) Inalids of Amid (Diyarbakr) Crusader Christian Dirhems Crusader Pseudo Aleppo Series Crusader Pseudo Damascus Series Crusader Pseudo Fatimid Series Islamic Style Crusader Coinage Ispahbads Danishmendids of Malatya Danishmendids of Siwas Post Ottoman Coin Series Darfur Datia Ghonds Madura as a Province of the Delhi Sultanate Sultans of Delhi Khaljis Lodis Slave Kings Sayyids Suns (Afghans) Tughluqs Dhar Dhu al Nunids of Toledo (Muluk al Tuwaif) Djibouti Dogra Rajas of Kashmir Dulafids of Kurdistan Durranis Barakzais Ceylon Netherlands Batavia (from 1644) Netherlands Batavian Republic (1799 - 1806) Khedives Kings of Egypt Post Ottoman Coin Series Egypt Elichpur Local Coinage of (N Deccan) Erelnids (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Kingdom of Ethiopia Bar Fals (Central Asian) Faruqi Sultans of Khandesh (Deccan States) Fatimid Glass Weights
**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Fatimids French French French French Gaikwars of Baroda Ganja Ganja Georgia Georgia Germiyan Oghullan Ghaznawids Ghurfah Ghunds (Main Line) Ghunds (Main Line) Giray Khans of the Crimea Golden Horde Golden Horde Golden Horde Golden Horde Golden Horde Golden Horde Gujarat (Sultans) Habband (Amirs of Sind) Hafsids Hamdanids Hamid Oghullan Hammudids of Algeciras (Muluk al-TawaiO Hammudids of Malaga (Muluk al Tawa lO Harar (Sultans) Hazaraspids Holkars of Indore Hotaki Afghan Hudids in Saragossa (Muluk al-Tawa'iO Husaynid Beys Husaynid Beys Idrisids Ikhshidids 11 Khanids 11 Khanids Rival Khans lldegizids Imad Shahis Imitations Imitations Inanj Oghullan Inaqids Injuids Iranian Civic Copper Iron Currency Isfendiyar Oghullan Isfendiyar Oghullan Islamabad-Mathura Jahwands of Cordova (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Jaipur Jaisalmir Jalaynds Janids Jaora Jats of Bhartpur Java Jhalawar Jind Jodhpur Johore Junagadh Kakuyids Karabakh (Panahabad) Karts Kashmir (Sultans) Kashmir (Sultans) Kashmir (Sultans) Page m **Mit.**

115, 116 442,444 442 444 442,444 442 444 200 202 128, 147

# 242 244 245 NC 099, 103

# 122, 123 200 202 090 NC 090 091 289, 296 091,092 115, 116 248, 257

# 374 NC

# 200 NC

283, 285 200, 202 420 429 090 NC 420,421 420, 421 420, 424 420,431 420, 425 457,459

# 122, 126 304 NC

**Mitchiner Listing** Fatimids of N Africa, Egypt & Syria Mahe (France) Mazulipalam (France) Murshidabad (France) Pondicherry (France) Gaikwars of Baroda Khans of Ganja Khans of the Caucasus Bagratids of Georgia Kingdom of Georgia Kermian of Kutahia (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Ghaznavids Sultanate of Ghurfah Amirate of Ghazni Ghonds Khans of the Knm (the Crimea) Blue Horde of Western Kipchak Khans of (he Golden Horde Rival Families in Western Kipchak Second Period of Rival Families United Blue & White Hordes White Horde in Eastern Kipchak Sultans of Gujarat Amirs of Sind Hafsids of Tunis Hamdanids Hamid (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Hammudids of Algeciras (Muluk al TuwaiO Hammudids of Malaga (Muluk al Tuwaif) Sultanate of Harar Hazaraspids Atabegs of Luristan (Lur Buzurg) Holkars of Indore Afghan Revolt Hudids of Saragossa (Muluk al Tuwaif) Hussainid Beys of Tunis Post Ottoman Coin Series Tunesia Idrisids of Morocco Ikhshidids of Egypt & Syria llkhans Mongols of Persia Period of the Rival Khans lldegezids Atabegs of Azerbaijan Imad Shahis of Berar (Deccan States) Castille Ethiopia (Sulayhids & Zurayids & Imitations) Amirs of Denizli (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Khans of Khiva Injuids of South western Iran Iranian CIVIC Copper Coinage Iron Currency of NE Indonesian Sultanates Isfendiarids (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Qizil Ahmadly (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Islamabad Mathura & Muminabad-Bindraban Jahwands of Cordoba (Muluk al TuwaiO Jaipur Jaisalmir Jalairids Janids of Astrakhan Jaora Jats of Bhartpur Java Jhalawar Jind Jodhpur Johore Junagadh Kakweyhids of Kurdistan Khans of Qarabagh Kerts of Herat Sultans of Kashmir Sultans of Kashmir - Family of Ghazi Khan Chak Sultans of Kashmir - Family of Shah Mirza Swati
**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Kedah Kelantan Kelantan - Patani Khanate of Khokand Khwarazm Shahs Kilwa (Sultans) Kishangarh Kotah Kuchawan Kutch Kutch Laccadive Islands Udakh Larins Larins Larins Larins Larins Larins Larins Larins Larins Lu'lu'ids Macassar (Sultans) Macassar (Sultans) Madura (Sultans) Majorca Rulers ll/12th Centuries (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Majorca Rulers 1 l/12th Centuries (Muluk al-Tawa'iO Majorca Rulers 1 l/12th Centuries (Muluk al-TawaiO Malacca (Rulers) Malay Peninsula Malay Peninsula Maldive Islands Maler Kotla Malwa Sultans Ghuns Malwa Sultans Khaljis Mamluks Bahri Line Mamluks Burji Line Mangits Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Maratha Mannids Marwanids Mataram Mazyadids Mengujekids Mengujekids Menteshe Oghullan Mewar Udaipur Mirdasids Mihrabanids Mirdasids Mogadishu Mongol Great Khans Mughal Emperors Mughal Emperors Mujahid of Denia *&* Majorca Banu (Muluk al Tawa'if) Muluk al-Tawa'if **Page in Mit.** 457, 459 457, 462 420, 429 420,431 420, 428

# 456,473 456, 473 091,092 091,092 091 NC 457, 458

198, 198 405, 406 405, 406 405, 406 405, 406 405, 406 405, 406 100, 106 122, 123 456, 470

# 122 NC 200 202 420 425

# 122 NC 239, 240 376,377 090, 092

**Mitchiner Listing** Kedah Kelantan Kelantan - Patani Khans of Khokand Khwarezm Shahs Sultanate of Kilwa-Mafia Kishangarh Kotah Kuchawan Kutch & Kathiawar Kutch Kutch Bhuj Laccadive Islands Ladakh Arabian Larins, Later Bijapur Larins Fish hook Larins of Ceylon Larins Larins struck by Uncertain Sefavid Shahs Maldive Island Larins Ottoman Larins struck at Basra Persian Larins struck by the Sefavids Persian Larins, Imitation Zangids of Mosul Celebes Sultanate of Macassar (Mangkasara Gowa) Sultans of Madura Bannu Ghaniya of Majorca (Muluk al Tuwaif) Bannu Mujahid of Majorca (Muluk al TuwaiO Kings of Majorca (Muluk al Tuwaif) Sultans of Malacca Malay Peninsula after circa AD 1750 Malay Penmsula Circa AD 1500-1750 Maldive Islands Maler Kotla Sultans of Malwa Ghons Sultans of Malwa Khaljis Bahn Mamlukes Burji Mamlukes Mangits of Bokhara Kalyan (Maratha States) Maratha Bhonsla Raja of Nagpur Maratha Bhonsla Rajas Maratha Confederate Coinage of Malwa & Environs Maratha Conquests North of the River Jumna Maratha Kingdoms in Western Malwa & Environs Maratha Sovereigns Marathas of Satara Marathas of Tanjore Nawabs of Ahmadabad (Maratha States) Nawabs of Broach (Maratha States) Nawabs of Surat (Maratha States) Nipani (Maratha States) Peshwas Poona the seat of the Peshwa (Maratha States) Marinids of Morocco Marwanids of Diyarbakr Mataram Mazyadids of Hilla Mangujakids of Divngi Mangujakids of Erzinjan Menteshid (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Mewar Udaipur Miknasa Berbers of Sijilmasa Saffarids, Late (Kings of Nimruz) Mirdasids of Aleppo Sultanate of Mogadishu Mongol Great Khans Moghul Empire Sultans of Kashmir - Moghul Conqueror Slave Kings of Denia (Muluk al Tuwaif) Muluk al Tuwaif (Reyes Taifas)
**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Murcia Rulers Almohads (Muluk al TawaiO Murcia Rulers Almohads (Muluk al Tawa'iO Murcia Rulers Almoravids (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Mutawakkilite Muzaffarids Mysore Mysore Nabha Narayan Pett (Rajas) Narwar Nasrids (Granada) Nasrids (Nimruz) Nawabs of Arcot Nawanagar Nl Nl NI Nl Nl NI NI NI NI NI NI NI Nl Nl NI NI NI Nl NI NI NI NI NI NI NI NI NI NI NI Nl NI Nl NI Nl Nl Nizam Shahis Nizams of Hyderabad Normans Obock Orchha Orthodox Caliphs Ottomans Ottomans Ottomans Ottomans Ottomans Ottomans Oudh (Awadh), Kings of Oudh (Awadh), Kings of Pahang Pahlawis Palembang Partabgarh Palam Patani Ligeh Patani Saibun Patiala in the **Punjab**

**Page in Mit.** **Mitchiner Listing** 100 NC Kings of Murcia lOONC Murcia, Kings of 098 NC Kings of Murcia Mutawakkilite Kings of the Yemen Muzaffarids 4^0 Mysore Islamic Period 450, 452 Mysore Return of Hinduism Nabha Rajas of Narayan Pett Narwar 100,103 Nasrids of Granada 128, 152 Later Saffands of Seistan (Kings of Nimruz) 436, 440 Nawabs of Arcot (the Carnatic) Nawanagar 084 Nl Abbasid Provincial Coinage Bokhara 113 Nl Aragon 469 NI Bangka, Island of 456 469 Nl Bantam 318 Nl Bulgaria 321 Nl Byzantine Coinage, Late (6th Cent AH) 478 NI Byzantine Sealing 064 NI Byzantium Early Period 322 Nl Crete under Venice 327 Nl Crusaders Antioch 328 Nl Crusaders Athens 329 NI Crusaders Cyprus (Venitian Period) 327 NI Crusaders Edessa 327 NI Crusaders Jerusalem 329 NI Crusaders Jerusalem & Cyprus 327 NI Crusaders Tripoli (Early Series) 328 Nl Crusaders Tripoli (Later Series) 328 Nl Crusaders Uncertain Mint 322 NI Dalmatia & Albania under Venice 317 NI Hungary 323 NI Kingdom of Trcbizond 063 NI Kingdom of Zabul 458 Nl Majopahit, Emblem Currency of 458 NI Malaya - Indonesia (Pre Islamic) 318 NI Moldavia 458 NI Namo Currency of Srivijaya 067 Nl Ostrogoths 460 Nl Patalung 462 Nl Patani Jala I13NI Portugal 471 NI Portugal Malacca (1511 1641.  467 NI Southern Malaya Chinese Merchant's Tokens 063 Nl Turco-Hephthalites 113NI United Spain 322 NI Venitian Coinage 374, 375 Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar (Deccan States) Nizams of the Deccan (Nizams of Hyderabad) Normans in the South Mediterranean Obock Orchha 055 NC Orthodox Caliphs Bayramic Village (Countermarked Ottoman) Countermarked Ottoman Copper Coinage Dardanelles (Countermarked Ottoman) 213, 214 Mytilene Island (Countermarked Ottoman) Ottoman Turks (Othmanlis) Thasos Island (Countermarked Ottoman) Awadh Kings of Awadh 457,466 Pahang 289,301 Pahlavis 456,469 Palembang 420,432 Partabgarh Patani Patani Ligeh (Ligor) Patani Saibun Patiala in the Punjab
**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Perak Pishkinid (at Ahar) Pontianak Porbander Port Al Rahman Portuguese Portuguese Portuguese Pseudo-Arabic Qa'iti Qadi Burhan al-Din OghuUan Qajars Qalhatid (Kings of Hormuz) Qara Qoyunlu Qara Qoyunlu Qarakhanids Qarakhanids Qarakhanids Qaraman Oghullan Qarlughid Qasimid Imams Qasimid Imams Qutb Shahis Qutlughkhanids Radhanpur Rajputana Ras Bab al Mandab Rassid Imams Rassid Imams Rasulids Ratlam Rawwadids Rewah Rupenid Kingdom Russian Pnncipalities Russian Principalities Russian Pnncipalities Russian Pnncipalities Russian Pnncipalities Russian Pnncipalities Russian Pnncipalities Sa'did Sharifs Safawids Saffands Saffands Sajids Salghunds Sallarids Saltuqids Samanids Samanids Sarbadands Sarukhan Oghullan Saugor Seals Seals Seals Seals Seljuqs of Rum Seijuqsof Syria Seljuqs Great Seljuqs Seljuqs Great Seljuqs (Iraq) Serbia Shah 1 Armanids Shahpura Sharaf Shahs of Bitlis (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Shaiqi Sultans of Jawnpur Sharwan Shahs First Line Sharwan Shahs First Line Sharwan Shahs First Line, Sharwan Shahs Second Line Page in **Mit.** 457 NC

| 442, 443 | 2(X), 203 | 289, 298 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 162 NC | 162, 163 | 200, 201 |
| 227,229 | 374, 375 | 227 NC |

# 162 NC 162, 163 200, 201

# 227,229 374, 375 227 NC 227, 228

# 122 NC

420, 433 319NI 3I9NI 319 NI 319N1 3I9NI 319 NI

# 128, 129 122, 123 122 NC 128, 145 128, 132 200, 201

# 160, 161 160 161 318N1 420, 432 200 203

**Mitchiner Listing** Perak Kings of Ahar Pontianak Porbander Port Al Rahman Diu (Portugal) Mozambique Portugal Malacca (1511 - 1641) Sweden & Afghanistan during Viking-Samanid Period Sultanate of Qaiti Qadi Burhan of Siwas (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Kajars Kings of Hormuz (Struck Larins) Kara Koyunlu Turcomans of the Black Sheep Qara Qoyunlu Great Khans in the East (Ilak Khans) (Qarakhanids) llak Khans (Qarakhanids) (Early Great Khans) Western Khanate (Ilak Khans) (Qarakhanids) Kdraman (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Shahs of Kurraman Imams of San a Imams of San'a as Ottoman Vassals Qutb Shahis of Golconda (Deccan States) Kutlugh Khans of Kirman Radhanpur States of Rajputana Ras Bab al Mandab Rassid Imams of Sa'da Rassid Imams of Sa'da Rasulid Imams of the Yemen Ratlam Rawwadids of Azerbaijan Rewah Rupenid Kingdom in Cilician Armenia Mojaisk Moscow Novgorod Riazan Russian Pnncipalities, Early Coinage of the Suzdal-Nizhny-Novgorod Tver Sa'dians Hasani Sharifs of Morocco Sefavids Saffand Rebel Saffands Sajites of Azerbaijan Salghurids Atabegs of Pars Sallarids of Dailam & Azerbaijan Salduqids of Erzurum Samanid Ghaznavid coinage of N Afghanistan Samanids Sarbedarids of Khorasan Saruhan (Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif) Saugor Ravishnagar Saugor Byzantine Sealing Islamic Seals & Sealings Ottoman Civic Sealings Seals Iranian Afghan Plateau Seljuqs of Rum Seljuqs of Syria Great Seljuqs Seljuqs of Iraq Serbia Begtimurids Atabegs of Armenia Shahpura Sharaf Shahs of Bitlis (Turkish Muluk al TuwaiO Sultans of Juanpur Kesranid Dynasty (First Dynasty - Shirwan Shahs) Khaqanid Shahs of Shirwan (Shirwan Shahs) Shirwan Shahs of the Caucasus Darbandid Dynasty (Second Dynasty Shirwan Shahs)
**Dynasty Listing (Modified from Bosworth)** Shanvan Shahs Second Line Shaybanids Shaybanids Shaybanids Sheki Shirvan (Shemakha) Sikhs Simjunds Sindhias of Gwalior Singgora Sudan Post Ottoman Coin Series Sulayhids Sulayhids Sumadih of Almeria, Banu (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Tahinds (Iran) Tahmds (Yemen) Tdifas Almoravides Talpur Mirs of Sind Tarim Ternate Tidore Timurids Timurids Timurids Timurids Timurids Timurids Timurids Tonk Trengganu Trengganu Tujibids in Saragossa (Muluk al Tawa lO Tulunids Turks in Anatolia Umayyad Caliphs Umayyads (Spain) Umayyads (Spain) Umayyads (Spam) Uqaylids Valencia (Muluk al Tawa'if) Valencia Almoravid-Almohad Period (Muluk al-Tawa'if) Wanparti, Rajas of Wattasids Yemen Yuan Dynasty (NI) Zands Zangids (Damascus & Aleppo) Zangids (Jazira) Zangids (Mosul & Aleppo) Zangids (Sinjar) Zanzibar Zenata Berbers of Maghrawa Zinds of Granada (Muluk al Tawa'if) Zinds of Kairouan Ziyanids Ziyands Zuray'ids Zuray'ids

Page in **Mil.** 283 NC 283 NC 304 NC 311,312 128, 145

# 090, 092

227 NC 456 NC 456 NC 276 NC 276,281 276 NC 276,282 276, 282 276 NC 420, 428 457, 459 457, 465 090 NC 086,087 055, 059

# 122 NC 100 NC

# 100, 111 239, 241 NI 289, 298

# 225 NC 090,091 093, 095 100, 104 128, 130

**Mitchiner Listing** Shirwan Shahs of the Caucasus Shaybanids of Transoxiana Shaybanids sub dynasty of Bokhara Shaybanids sub dynasty of Samarkand Khans of Sheki(Nukha) Khans of Shamakhi (Shirwan Shahs) Sikhs Simjund (Local issues of NE Afghanistan) Sindhias of Gwalior Singgora Post Ottoman Coin Series Sudan Ethiopia (Sulayhids & Zurayids & Imitations) Sulayhids of the Yemen Banu Sumadih of Almeria (Muluk al Tuwaif) Tahinds Tahinds of the Yemen Taifas Almoravids Talpur Mirs of Sind Sultanate of Tanm Ternate Tidore Timurids Timurids sub-dynasty of Balkh Timurids sub-dynasty of Pars & Seistan Timurids sub dynasty of Jibal Timurids sub-dynasty of Kabul & Kandahar Timurids sub-dynasty of Khorasan Timurids sub dynasty of Uzkand & Ferghana Tonk Trengganu (1500 1750 AD) Trengganu (after 1750 AD) Tujibids of Saragossa (Muluk al Tuwaif) Tulunids Turkish Muluk al Tuwaif Omayyad Coinage, Reformed Al Andalus Cordoba Imitations of Islamic Coins, Western European Omayyads of Spain Oqaylids of Mosul Kings of Valencia Kings of Valencia Rajas of Wanparti Wattasids of Morocco British Sphere in the Hydramout Yuan Dynasty Zands Zangids of Aleppo Zangids of Al Jezirah Zangids of Mosul Zangids of Sinjar Sultanate of Zanzibar Zenata Berbers of Maghrawa Zinds of Granada (Muluk al TuwaiO Zinds Ziyanids of Tlemcen & W Algeria Ziyands Ethiopia (Sulayhids & Zurayids & Imitations) Zurayids of the Yemen