No. 246 Winter 2021 ISSN 1818-1252 **Editor ** Karan Singh
# 

** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 246 ** Page

*Some New Varieties and Types of Copper Coins of the Agra Tribe* ~ Devendra Handa

*Classification of Sado Iron Coins from the Bunkyu Period* ~ John Madlon * *

*Catalogue of the Coins of the Bengal Presidency - Part II* ~ Paul Stevens and Robert Johnston

Book Review: *Ancient Indian Coins: A Comprehensive Catalogue (Wilfried Pieper) * ~ Karan Singh ONS News * *

**From the Editor** ** ** Here is another volume that showcases the wide range that is Oriental numismatics. The first paper provides a detailed glimpse of the copper coins of the Agra *janapada* of ancient Punjab. We then take a look at the iron coins that were cast on a Japanese island in the 19 th century. And finally, there is the second part of the updated coin catalogue of the Bengal Presidency of the East India Company. In our ONS News, we provide the results of the first detailed survey of our members to gauge your interests.

It gives me great pleasure to announce that the ONS Council has awarded the Ashoka Prize 2020 for the best article published in the Journal that year to J. Mark Ritchie for his 'The Tozai Senpu Coin Rubbings and Kutsuki Masatsuna's Vietnamese coins', which featured in JONS 240. Our congratulations to Mark and our thanks also to the other authors whose articles were published in the Journal. **Karan Singh**
# SOME NEW VARIETIES AND TYPES OF

# COPPER COINS OF THE AGRA TRIBE

## Devendra Handa

The first specimens of copper coins later identified as the coins of the Agra tribe were published by James Prinsep (1858: pl. XX.44). It was John Allan who read almost correctly the Brahmi legends *agodaka * *\[ja\]napaadasa, * *agodaka/e * *agacha-* *janapadasa* and *agachamitapadabhish(ch)aya* on some specimens (Allan 1936: cliii-clviii, 279, 282-83). *Agodaka* of the coins could be easily equated with *Agrodaka*, a place mentioned twice in the Buddhist text *Mahamayuri * (Levi, 1915: 34, 49, 65 & 99) which M.J. Przyluski had identified in 1926 with Agroha, 23 km from Hisar on the Delhi-Fazilka highway (Przyluski 1926: 16 ff). Rodgers had procured most of his specimens from Barwalla, 15 km southwest of Agroha (Rodgers 1891/1895: 4143). In his excavations at Agroha during 1938-39, H.L. Srivastava obtained a hoard of 51 such coins from the same level from which also came a hoard of five silver coins in a bowl, of Indo-Greek rulers Antialkidas, Apollodotos I, Strato and Amyntas and one punch-marked coin (Srivastava 1952). A year later, L.D. Barnett derived the Prakrit word *agacha* of the coinlegends from *agratya* (Barnett 1940: 277 ff), and P.L. Gupta (Gupta 1942: 49-52) suggested its derivation from *agreya* (a derivative of *agra* ) as occurring in the *Mahabharata * (III.254, 19-21). K.K. Dasgupta's suggestion to derive the word *agacha* from *agratya* on the analogy of *Paschatya*, *Dakshinatya* etc., seems to be more reasonable (Dasgupta 1974: 3).

Agroha has an extensive mound extending over more than 640 acres of land and rising at places to more than 20 meters. Excavations here have revealed its occupation from the late Painted Grey Ware period to the medieval times ( *IAR* 1978-79: 68-69; 1979-80: 31; 1980-81: 15-16). Tradition ascribes its foundation to an eponymous king Agrasena from whom the Agrawala *banias* (mercantile caste) derive their descent ( *IGI*, I: 242). Coins, seals and sealings, stone sculptures, terracottas, and various types of antiquities and structures reveal that it was a flourishing place in the Early Historic Period and served as the metropolis of the Agra tribe (Rodgers 1891: 41-43; Smith 1906: 206; Allan 1936: 279-82, Mitchiner 1976: 649; Saraswati 1974: 31-50; Daivakarni 2008, 2010: 19-21; Handa 2007a: 35-51; 2021: 80-96). References to the Agras in *Chandra-vyakarana* (II.4, 35), a grammatical work of Chandragomin of circa 470 CE or 6 th century CE, the *Kasika * (IV.1, 99) ascribable to the 7 th century CE and *Sarasvatikanthabharana* of king Bhoja of the 11 th century CE, together with its antiquarian remains, indicate that the town continued to prosper till it was attacked and burnt by Muhammad Ghori in 1194 CE (Haig 1958: 41). We learn from the accounts of Muslim historians Zia-ud-Barani, Shamsi-Siraj and Ibn-i-Batuta that the final blow was struck by a severe famine during the reign of Muhammad Tughlaq, when it was deserted and the sultan made use of its material, obtained by demolishing Hindu temples and buildings, for the construction of Hisar-i-Firoza (Haig 1958: 153; Srivastava 1952).

Reference to a teacher named Agrayana in the *Nirukta* (X.8) in 9 th -8 th centuries BCE and Panini's mention of Agra (IV.1, 99) as a *gotra* (clan) and Agrayana as a people (IV.1, 102), indicate the antiquity of the tribe. In Alexander's time there existed a people mentioned as Agalossoi (or Agalesseis) by the Classical writers (Diodorus XVII.86; Curtius IX.4), in the neighborhood of the Siboi (Sibis), living at and around Sivapura, identified with Shorkot in Jhang district of Pakistan (McCrindle 1896: 285 ff). Agalossoi/Agalesseis is the exact transcription of *Agrasah*, the optional nominative plural form of Agra according to a grammatical rule of Vedic Sanskrit as laid down by Panini in the 5 th century BCE. According to Quintus Curtius, the Agalossoi with 40,000 foot-soldiers and 3,000 horses gave a very stiff resistance to Alexander. Under the pressure of the Indo-Greeks, they seem to have shifted to the Agroha area like the Siboi, Maloi and Oxydrakai. The *Mahabharata* (III.254, 20) refers to the Agreyas in association with the Bhadras (people of Bhadra), Rohitakas (denizens of Rohtak), and Malavas, as conquered by Karna during his western expedition, indicating their present location.

Taking stock of all of their known coin-types in 2007, I had listed seven types with different varieties (Handa 2007b: 6-12):

(1) Bull Type (2) Lion Type (3) Composite Animal Type (4) Lakshmi Type (5) Chaitya Type (6) Temple Type and (7) Chakra Type In 2017, I added a new Elephant Type to the list, with three varieties of round copper coins (Handa 2017: 1-9; Pieper 2021: 180, nos. 1009-11), to which were supplemented in 2019 two newer varieties of square Elephant Type coins (Handa 2019: 1618). During the last a few years, some more varieties of the known types and newer types have surfaced, inspiring me to bring them to the notice of numismatists and collectors as they throw fresh light on the history and economy of the Agras. **New Varieties of Known Types ** **1. Bull Type ** *Fig. 1. Copper coin with bull (SC) *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing with Brahmi legend *(a\*)godaka* from

3 to 4 o'clock position, with traces of ( *a)gacha* below the railing Reverse: Bull walking right on a track indicated by two lines The coin has been over-struck on an earlier piece, with faint traces visible of the undertype impression. The realistic depiction of the bull on this coin is, however, remarkable, not witnessed on any Agra coin earlier. --- **2. Lakshmi Type **

* * *Fig. 2. Copper coin with Lakshmi, 3.5 g, 14 mm (SC) *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing with Brahmi legend *ag(o)daka *

*ag(acha) * from 2 to 6 o'clock position in deep incuse, struck on an earlier coin of which the Brahmi legend *agoda(ka * *a)gacha janapadasa* in bold characters may be seen along the edge from about 8 to 5 o'clock position Reverse: Lakshmi standing facing, holding in both her hands
stalks of lotus flowers. The face and breasts of the deity are marked by globular dots and the head bears an arch-like coiffure resembling that seen on Mathura coins

The obverse clearly indicates that the coin was re-authenticated by the tribal authority, like many other examples.

*Fig. 3. Copper coin with Abhisheka-Lakshmi (SB) *

Obverse: Tree in railing with traces of legend Reverse: Lakshmi standing on an arched symbol, holding long
stalks of lotus flowers supporting elephants anointing the goddess, Brahmi legend *ago(daka)* on left and *janapadasa* on right are very clear.

Both the obverse and reverse seem to have been over-struck on an earlier coin. ** ** **3. Hill Type ** ** **

*Fig. 4. Copper coin with Lakshmi and hill, 2.72 g *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing in the centre; of the Brahmi legend,
only *daka* at 1 to 1.30 o'clock and *padasa* at 8.30 to 10 o'clock position are visible Reverse: Lakshmi holding the long stalk of the lotus flower in
her right hand resembling the preceding example, counterstruck by an arched symbol with bold pellets in the arches **4. Elephant Type **

* * *Fig. 4. Copper coin with Lakshmi and elephant (RA) * The obverse in Fig. 4 shows the usual Agra device of tree-inrailing which has been over-struck by the *Abhisheka* -Lakshmi device. Traces of the Brahmi legend may be seen along the right edge. The reverse is also over-struck. The main device of treein-railing and Brahmi legend *janapa(dasa)* has the elephant standing left above. This is another example of re-struck Agra coins. *Fig. 5. Copper coin with elephant (SC)*

| Another round copper coin (Fig. 5) seen in trade has also been | over-struck on both sides, with a tree-in-railing on the obverse | and elephant standing left on the reverse. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Fig. 6. Copper coin with elephant, 4.64 g, 21 mm (RY) | Wilfried Pieper (2021: 150, no. 1011) has recently published an | Elephant Type coin over-struck on Lion Type (Fig. 6). |
| We will now look at square and rectangular varieties of the | Elephant Type, including two specimens (Figs. 7-8) that I | brought to light in 2019 (Handa 2019: 18). |

*Fig. 6. Copper coin with elephant, 4.64 g, 21 mm* *(RY)* Wilfried Pieper (2021: 150, no. 1011) has recently published an Elephant Type coin over-struck on Lion Type (Fig. 6).

We will now look at square and rectangular varieties of the Elephant Type, including two specimens (Figs. 7-8) that I brought to light in 2019 (Handa 2019: 18).
*Fig. 7. Copper coin with elephant, 1.58 g, 15 mm (SC)*

The obverse shows the usual tree-in-railing as the main device, with part of the Brahmi legend *agacha (jana)padasa* written perpendicularly from bottom to top on the left of the tree and top to bottom on the right. The reverse shows an elephant to left in a square frame. *Fig. 8. Copper coin with elephant (RY)*

The obverse in Fig. 8 has a tree-in-railing with part of the vertical Brahmi legend *(a)godake (agacha-janapadasa)*. The reverse has an elephant walking to right. It is difficult to identify the undertype. *Fig. 9. Copper coin with elephant (SC)*

The coin in Fig. 9 is also probably overstruck on an earlier Agra coin. The tree-in-railing with Brahmi legend *padasa* from 9 to 10 o'clock position is very clear, and traces of the earlier legend on left and right corners may also be made out on the obverse. The reverse shows an elephant walking to right.

*Fig. 10. Copper coin with elephant, 1.33 g, 16x12 mm (RY)*

The rectangular coin in Fig. 10 shows a tree-in-railing on the obverse with part of the Brahmi legend *(ago)daka* near the lower right corner. An elephant walking to right is clear on the reverse. We thus see that even in the square specimens, we have the elephant depicted to left and right like in the round coins. **New Types ** **1. Horse Type **

*Fig. 11. Copper coin with horse and Lakshmi, * *3.0 g, 16 mm (SC) *

Obverse: Maned horse standing to right, Brahmi legend

| agacha ja(napadasa) along the upper and right edges, with | a jumbled impression probably of the railed tree and legend | on the lower edge | Reverse: Lakshmi standing facing with splayed feet on a lotus, |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| holding, in both hands, long stalks of lotuses (which may | have had elephants to bathe the goddess), with a semi- | circular double-lined track or river (with fish?) below the | goddess |
| It sems that the horse device in Fig. 11 has been struck on the | obverse on an earlier coin that had a tree-in-railing and legend, | an example of which was published by me earlier (Handa 2017: | 6). |
holding, in both hands, long stalks of lotuses (which may have had elephants to bathe the goddess), with a semicircular double-lined track or river (with fish?) below the goddess

It sems that the horse device in Fig. 11 has been struck on the obverse on an earlier coin that had a tree-in-railing and legend, an example of which was published by me earlier (Handa 2017: 6).

*Fig. 12. Copper coin with horse, 3.25 g, 15 mm (SC) *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing with the undertype tree-in-railing
visible at top right; Brahmi legend *aga * is visible between 11 and 12 o'clock position Reverse: Horse striding to right

*Fig. 13. Copper coin with horse, 0.83 g, 14 x 9 mm (SC) *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing with thick branches, Brahmi legend

*napadasa* in bold characters from 7 to 9 o'clock position Reverse: Horse standing left
*Fig. 14. Copper coin with horse and elephants (SC) *

Obverse: In a deep square incuse, partially-visible upper part
of a tree-in-railing, overstruck by a horse standing right; Brahmi legend *(da)ka janapadasa* below and at left Reverse: In a lined square frame, two elephants anointing a
tree-in-railing (representing Lakshmi) placed on a triangular arched symbol. **2. ** ***Srivatsa*** ** Type ** The *srivatsa* symbol seen on the two specimens in Figs. 15-16 differs from the usual srivatsa, having a vertical line with two Slike symbols flanking it. This symbol resembles the *srivatsa* seen on some of the Karttikeya-Devasena coins of the Yaudheyas (Singh 2021: 5, coin B5).

* * *Fig. 15. Copper coin with srivatsa (VP) *

Obverse: The first impression struck on this coin was the tree-
in-railing with the usual legend, of which *agacha jana* -  may be seen from about 10 to 2 o'clock position, over-struck by a bold *srivatsa* ( ) Reverse: Jumbled impression of tree-in-railing and some other symbols

*Fig. 16. Copper coin with srivatsa, 1.06 g, 13 mm (SC) *

Obverse: Tree in railing of eight compartments, with flaring
branches having leaves on both sides ( ); traces of Brahmi legend *(a)goda* from 8 to 10 o'clock and *(pa)dasa* from 2 to 3 o'clock position in a round die impression, struck on an earlier larger flan coin showing part of the Brahmi legend *padasa* at 5 to 7 o'clock position Reverse: Traces of a bold *srivatsa* ( ) with a taurine at 2 o'clock position The tree of this type (Fig. 16) in an 8-compartmented railing is not known on any other Agra specimen. **3. ** ***Nandipada *** **Type **

* * *Fig. 17. Copper coin with elephant (SC) *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing with partially preserved Brahmi
legend *padasa* from 5 to 8 o'clock position in a round incused die-impression. Part of a letter (probably *a* of *agacha* ) may also be seen. That the coin has been overstruck on an earlier piece is clear by the existence of the undertype tree-in-railing at 9 o'clock position Reverse: A bold *nandipada* or *triratna* symbol

**4. ** ***Nandyavarta *** **Type ** *The nandyavarta* symbol seen here (Fig. 18) is made of four conjoined *nandipadas*. ** ** ** **

**   ** ** ** * * *Fig. 18. Copper coin with nandyavarta, 0.87 g, 13 mm (SC) *

Obverse: Tree-in-railing in the centre, with Brahmi legend

*agodaka a-gacha ja-napadasa* along the right, lower and left edge Reverse: *Nandyavarta* symbol

** ** **Analysis ** We can thus add the above-mentioned Horse, Srivatsa, *Nandipada * and *Nandyavarta* Types to the hitherto known eight types listed earlier, bringing the total to 12 types of Agra coins known so far.

The numerous varieties struck by the Agras indicate that the tribe had a long rule of more than a century, though in a limited territory, as revealed by the findspots of these coins at and around Agroha. The Bull and Lion Types seem to have a large number of varieties and are the most common, followed by the Hill, Lakshmi and Horse Types as far as the number of varieties are concerned. Coins of the Temple, Composite Animal, Chakra, *Srivatsa*, *Nandipada*, and *Nandyavarta* types are known from very few specimens.

The obverse generally shows a tree-in-railing and the Brahmi legend *agodaka agacha janapadasa* or its variants and *agachamitapadabhish(/th)ayinah*, the latter version being comparatively rarer. The tree depicted was the family tree ( *kula-* *druma* ) of the Agras. It may have been the *sthala-vriksha * (local area tree) of the area occupied by the tribe.

Another important point is the over-striking of these coins. No scholar has paid heed to this practice or offered any explanation. As noted above, the over-striking has been done on existing earlier Agra coins. It is quite intelligible that it was done to reauthenticate Agra coins already in circulation, which had lost the legend and/or devices because of being in circulation and wearing out. There are, however, several pieces on which the earlier legends or devices may still be seen clearly. When these could easily be recognised as issues of the tribe, it is not clear what need there may have been to re-strike the coins. My
tentative suggestion is that the different devices may have belonged to different elected ruling authorities (individuals or parties) who put their insignia on the new coins being issued or the coins that came back to the state treasury in the form of taxes or penalties. ** ** **Sources of images ** RA R.K. Aggarwal RK Ravinder Kundra RY Ranjan Yadav SB Shailendra Bhandare SC Sanjeev Chagti VP Vishal Parikh ** ** **Abbreviations ** *IAR * * Indian Archaeology - A Review * *IGI * *Imperial Gazetteer of India* ***  *** ** ** **Bibliography ** Allan, J., 1936, *Catalogue of Coins of Ancient India*, London.

Barnett, L.D., 1940, 'Another Ancient Tribe of the Panjab', *Bulletin of *

*the School of Oriental and African Studies*, London, X, pp. 277 ff.

Daivakarni, V., 2008, *Agroha (Agrodaka) ki Mrinmurtiyan*, Jhajjar.

Daivakarni, V., 2010, *Bharata ke Prachina Mudranka*, Jhajjar, pp. 19- 21.

Dasgupta, K.K., 1974, *A Tribal History of Ancient India - A Numismatic * *Approach*, Calcutta.

Gupta, P.L., 1942, 'Identification of Agacha on Agroha Coins', *Journal *

*of the Numismatic Society of India*, Vol. IV, pp. 49-52.

Haig, W., 1958, *Cambridge History of India*, Vol. III, Delhi.

Handa, D., 1989, 'Agroha Revisited', in *Praci-Prabha - Perspectives in *

*Indology: Essays in honour of Professor B.N. Mukherjee*, ed. D.C. Bhattacharyya and D. Handa, New Delhi, pp. 239-51, pls. 24-43.

Handa, D., 2007a, 'Seals and Sealings from Agroha', *Nidhi*, Vol. II, Nagpur, pp. 35-51.

Handa, D., 2007b, *Tribal Coins of Ancient India*, New Delhi, pp. 6-12.

Handa, D., 2017, 'Some More Interesting Coins of The Agra Tribe', *Numismatic Digest*, Vol. 41, pp. 1-9.

Handa, D., 2019, 'Elephant Type Coins of the Agra Tribe', *Souvenir, * *Mumbai Coin Society*, pp. 16-18.

Handa, D., 2021, *Facets of Indian Art, Iconography and Numismatics*, New Delhi, 80-96.

*Indian Archaeology - A Review*, 1978-79, 1979-80, 1980-81, New Delhi.

Levi, S., 1915, 'Mahamayuri', *Journal Asiatique*, pp. 19-138.

McCrindle *, * J.W., 1896, *The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great as *

*Described by Arrian, Q. Curtius, Diodorus, Plutarch and Justin,* Westminster, pp. 285 ff.

Mitchiner, M., 1976, *Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian Coinage*, Vol. 7, London.

Prinsep, J., 1858, *Essays on Indian Antiquities*, ed. E. Thomas, London.

Przyluski, J., 1926, *Ancient* *Peoples of the Punjab - The Udumbaras and *

*Salvas*, Eng. tr. C. Sen from the original French articles published in *Journal Asiatique*, 1926 and 1929, 1962 reprint, Calcutta, p. 16 ff.

Rodgers, C.J., 1891, *Report of the Panjab Circle of the Archaeological * *Survey for 1888-89*, pp. 41-43, Lahore.

Saraswati, S.O., VS 2031 (1976), *Ancient Seals of Haryana*, Jhajjar, pp. 31-50.

Smith, V., 1906, *Indian Museum Catalogue*, Vol. I, Oxford.

Singh, K., 2021, 'Legends on the Karttikeya-Devasena Coins of the

Yaudheyas: A New Classification', *JONS* 243, pp. 3-7.

Srivastava, H.L. 1952, *Excavation at Agroha*, Memoirs of the

Archaeological Survey of India, No. 61, 1999 reprint, Delhi.

*The Imperial Gazetteer of India*, Vol. I, Oxford.
# CLASSIFICATION OF SADO IRON **COINS FROM THE BUNKYU PERIOD **

** ** John Madlon Sado Island ( 佐渡島 *Sado-shima* ), the sixth largest island in Japan, is located in the Sea of Japan, 32 km from the northwestern coast of Honshu. It is the location of the 佐渡銀山 *Sado Gizan, * a complex of gold and silver mines which were active prior to the Tokugawa period (1603-1867) until their final closure in the 1980s (the Sado Mine Complex was nominated for the UN World Heritage list in 2010). Sado Island was a direct rule territory during the Tokugawa period, and as such the coinage of Sado was controlled by the Shogunate via the local magistrate's office, called the 佐渡奉行 *Sado Bugyo*. Coinage cast at Sado was primarily copper; however, iron coins were cast from 1740-1741 and 1862-1867. The coins produced during the latter period have not been described in any sort of detail outside of Japanese publications. In this paper, I will propose a classification of the varieties of iron 1 *Mon* coins that were cast on Sado from 1862-1867. **Historical background  ** During the Genbun period (1736-41), Japanese copper production underwent a continuous decline, causing a shortage of mined copper with which to cast coins (Kobada 1983: 168). In order to maintain a sufficient output of coinage to support the growing cash economy, the casting of iron coins was authorised by the Bakufu in Edo to provide a sufficient amount of base metal coinage for circulation. Casting of iron coins was first authorised at Aikawa, Sado province in 1740, with the casting of iron coins commencing during Genbun 5, 4 th month (late April to early May 1740), until it was suspended by order of the Edo authorities on Kampo 1, 6 th month 5 th day (1741-07-17). 1 No iron coinage was cast on Sado during the Meiwa period. Iron coinage was again authorised in 1863 during the Bunkyu period. Casting of these coins was carried out from Bunkyu 2, 3 rd month until Keio 3, 4 th month (May 1863-May 1867). 2 Iron coins cast during this period are known as 文久背佐鉄銭 *bunkyu hai sa * *tessen* ('Bunkyu *Sa* Reverse Iron Coins') in Japanese. It is not known how many coins were cast during this period; however, none of the varieties are particularly rare, save for the narrow *sa* /narrow rims type, which is less common.

**Bunkyu Period Iron Coins ** The overall design of the coin is similar to the iron coins cast at Kosuge 3 during the 1760s, where the 貝 of 寶 is written with the legs like 人. The main differences between Kosuge and Sado coins are that the latter are (1) smaller in diameter by over 1 mm (than the Kosuge coins), and (2) they bear as a mint-mark the character 佐 *sa* written in orthodox script ( 正字 *seiji* ) on the reverse above the inner rim. The adoption of this style is a departure from previous Sado iron coins which utilised the 'Genbun style' prevalent in the 1730s, and the 佐 character had been written in a semi-cursive manner. Ogawa and Yuji both report the existence of Sado iron coins without the mintmark, with only mother coins known. However, this type is only illustrated by Ogawa in the *Katarogu* where he gives the dimensions of 23.4 mm OD, 20.0 mm ID and a weight of 4.1 g. 4 The *Tebiki*, in the notes below #50, states that "it has been said there is \[a type\] with wide reverse rims and no mintmark ( 背 濶 縁の無背がある由 )."

There are three variants of the character 佐: wide, medium and narrow. The main difference is in the size of the character 佐; however, there are other subtle differences between the coins as well. Here is a summary of the other key differences between the types:

1. The width of the 目 *me * of 寶 *ho* - the wide 佐 type has a
wider 目 of 寶 than both the medium and narrow 佐 types. 2. The 工 *kou* radical of 佐:

- Narrow 佐 * - * 工 is written with the top and bottom
strokes parallel - Medium 佐 - the top stroke of 工 tilted left  - Large 佐 - narrower 工 than the narrow or medium
types. Additionally, each of these three types has a wide and a narrow rim variety which describes the thickness of the obverse inner rims. The existence of wide and narrow inner rim coins is due to the finishing of the mother coins ( 銅母銭 *do bosen* ). All of the mother coins were cast with wide rims, then the insides of the holes were filed, giving the mother coins either wide (less filed) or narrow (more filed) inner rims. There is a difference in opinion among Japanese sources, such as Yuji and Tebiki, as to whether the inner rim finishing makes for a distinct variety. I do consider these to be distinct varieties within their respective types, since the differences in circulation coins were caused by differences in the mother coins, rather than differences caused by production processes where identical mothers were used.

1 Kobada (p. 168), quoting a letter titled 銑銭座停止 *Zuku *

*Zenza Teishi*, which ordered a halt to casting of iron coins on 寛保元年六月五日 (Kampo 1, 6 th month 5 th day).

2 寛永銭研究牒 *Kanei sen kenkyūcho*, p. 38: " 自文久三年四

月至慶応三年四 "; *Tebiki* p. 21: " 文久佐渡銭... 文久二年三 月... 相川鋳造... 元治元年 ".

3 " 小菅銭が手本ある (Kosuge-sen used as a model)," *Tebiki, * - 21.

4 新寛永通宝カタログ #93 (mother coin only) 無背 *mu hai, * or
blank reverse. This coin is the same stylistically as the Anei Period iron coins, but with a smaller diameter. The outer
diameter of this coin given by Ogawa is similar to the diameters of all of the types with mintmarks I have found published (23.3-25.7 mm). It is worth noting that Ogawa did not take the data himself (as indicated by the \* where a quantity of specimens would be), yet he assigned it a value of ¥200-300,000 in 1987. Yuji states on p. 27 that there are "... mother coins with small characters/blank reverse but I didn't get a chance to see them and the details were unknown so I omitted the incomplete illustrations ( 小字背佐無背の母銭は 実見の機会が得されず, 詳細不明のため, 不備ながさ図 版は省略した )". --- *Table A. Illustrations of types * ** ** Wide Inner Rims Narrow Inner Rims Wide *Sa *

Note: due to the difficulty making clear rubbings, the illustrated obverse and reverse in this row are from different coins.

Left: 22.9 mm/19.1 mm/3.34 g Right: 23.1 mm/19.0 mm/3.18 g

Left: 23.0 mm/19.2 mm/3.08 g Right: 23.0 mm/19.0 mm/2.84 g Medium *Sa* 23.2 mm/19.2 mm/3.48 g 23.2 mm/19.3 mm/3.55 g Narrow *Sa* Not illustrated 22.8 mm/19.1 mm/3.18 g
*Table B. Appearance in Japanese catalogues * ** ** **Variety ** (R=rubbing, P=photo, D=description only (not illustrated), \*=mother) Small *Sa* Medium *Sa* Large Sa Narrow Rims

Wide Rims Narrow Rims Wide Rims Narrow Rims Wide Rims Blank reverse **Catalogue **

Ogawa 1956 (1974) R D Ogawa 1987 R R Yuji 1998 R D Kida 2015 R, P \* R, P \* R, P \* Shizuoka 2009 R \* D R \* **Acknowledgements ** All scans and rubbings were made by the author, and all of the coins pictured are in the author's collection. **Bibliography ** Imaizumi, C. (ed.), 1930, 今泉忠左衛門. 寛永銭研究牒 *Kanei sen *

*kenkyūcho* (Researches on Kanei Coins), Aichi: 今泉忠左衛門. Kobada, A., 1983, 小葉田浮. 近世、佐渡の鋳銭と産銅 *Kinsei, Sado *

*no isen to san dō * (Sado Coin Production in the Early Modern Period). Transactions of the Japan Academy, Vol. 39, Issue 2, pp. 159-189. Ogawa, Y., 1974, 小川吉儀. 新寛永銭鑑識と手引 *Shin Kanei Tsuho *

*Kanshiki To Tebiki * (Guide to the Determination of New Kanei Tsuho), fourth edition, Tokyo: 万国貨幣洋行. Ogawa, Y., 1987, 小川吉儀. 新寛永通宝カタログ *Shin Kanei Tsuho *

*Katarogu * (The Catalog of Japanese Coins "Shin Kanei Tsuho"), in Shozo (ed.) 白川昌三 *Shirakawa*, Shimizu City (Shizuoka): 若富土 社. Okudaira, M., 1938, 奥平昌洪. 東亜銭志 *Toa Senshi * (Record of East

Asian Coins), Vol. 13, Tokyo: 岩波書店 *Iwanami Shoten*. Ohkura, T., and Hiroshi, S., 1978, 'The Tokugawa Monetary Policy in
the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries', *Japanese Economic History * *1600-1970*, Vol. 6, *The Japanese Economy in the Tokugawa Era, * *1600-1868*, pp. 241-265; originally published in 'Explorations in Economic History 15', pp. 101-124. Rikio, K., 2015, 利喜男木田. 喜寶古希記念 寛永銭譜 *Kiho koki *

*kinen kan'ei sen fu*. Tokyo: 書信館出版㈱. Shizuoka, I., 2009, 静岡いづみ会. Anasen Nyumon- Kanei Tsuho- Shin

Kanei Nobu 穴銭入門 寛永通宝－新寛永銭の部, 3 rd, Shizuoka: 書信館出版㈱. Yuji, K., 1998, 工藤裕司. Shin kan'ei tsūhō zue 新寛永通寶図会 Shin

Kanei Tsuho Illustrations, Hudson Company ㈱ハドソン. Hutchison, J., and Vogel, J.P.H., 1933, *History of the Punjab Hill States*, Lahore. Pieper, W., 2021, *Ancient Indian Coins: A Comprehensive Catalogue*, Mumbai.

Stein, M.A., 1900, *Kalhana's Rajatarangini - A Chronicle of the Kings *

*of Kashmir*, three volumes, Indian edition, 2017 reprint, Delhi.

Tandon, P., 2013, 'Notes on the Evolution of Alchon Coins', *JONS* 216, pp. 24-34.

Tsiang, H., 1884, *Si-Yu-Ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World*, translated by S. Beal, two volumes, London.
# CATALOGUE OF THE COINS OF THE

# BENGAL PRESIDENCY - PART II

## Paul Stevens and Robert Johnston ** **

## Calcutta Mint 1790 to 1800

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Mohur -  **

**Shah 'Alām II - 1790 ** First issued at the end of August 1790, see comments. Differs from the next type in not having the extra tiny dot in the top line of the obverse. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh 1202 * (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah * *19 julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Official Wt (g) ** 12.36 **Wt (g) ** 12.29 **Diam (mm) ** 25.5-26.2 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **4.1 ** N **4.2 ** **- ** - Copper trial pieces. No specimens discovered.

# N/A

*No extra dot in top line * *Extra dot in top line *

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Mohur &  **

**Half Mohur - Shah 'Ālam II- 1793 ** Distinguished from the previous type by the presence of a dot in the top line of the obverse. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh 1202* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs        * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Mohur ** **Half Mohur ** **Official Wt (g) ** 12.36 6.18 **Wt (g) ** 12.34 6.15 **Diam (mm) ** 26.5-26.9 21.6-21.8 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**4.3 ** Mohur Currency S **4.4 ** " Proof RR **4.5 ** Half Mohur Currency S **4.6 ** " Proof RR See also Dakka, Murshīdābād and Patna mints

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Gold Quarter Mohur ** **- Shāh 'Ālam II - 1793-1818 **

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Official Wt (g) ** 3.09 **Wt (g) ** 3.09 **Diam (mm) ** 16.7-17.0 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right --- **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination ** **Status ** **Comments** ** ** **Rarity **

**4.7 ** 64 Quarter Mohur Currency Dot in middle group on reverse. S **4.8 ** 67 " Proof RR See also Dakka, Murshīdābād and Patna mints

**Privy Marks ** **Mohur/Rupee, Half Mohur/Rupee **

*No dot in circles - Calcutta * *Dot in right-hand circle - * *Patna * *Dot in centre circle - * *Murshīdābād * *Dot in left-hand circle - * *Dakka * **Quarter Mohur/Rupee ** *Calcutta - dot in centre * *group * * * *Patna - dot in left group * * * * * *Dakka - dot in right * *group * *Murshīdābād - no dot *

*Order from top: Calcutta, Calcutta, Dakka, Calcutta, Dakka *

*Dakka quarter rupees have cruder edge markings * *(see 3* *rd* * and 5* *th* * coin) *

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee - 1792 - **

**Wide Border ** Pridmore assigned this type with wide border and AH dates to trials in 1790. However, see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com> for reasons for assigning it to a later date. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202. *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs        * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 **Wt (g) ** 11.63 **Diam (mm) ** 29.5-29.8 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**4.9 ** Currency RR **4.10 ** - - Proof  Ref: Baldwin (2000), Sale 22 (Wheeler), Lot 161. Could this just be a wellstruck piece?

# RRR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Silver Rupee -  **

**1793 to 1794, Narrow Border ** The earliest milled rupee, issued for circulation, has the date AH 1202 on the obverse. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs.        * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) --- Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202).

**Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 **Wt (g) ** 11.63 **Diam (mm) ** 28.8-29.4 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **4.11 ** With AH date and no dots in circles on obverse.

# S See also Patna and Murshīdābād mints

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Pattern Rupee **

**& Half Rupee - 1793 to 1818 ** Patterns for silver coins issued from 1794 to 1818 (although they could also have been patterns for the gold coins). The date when they were struck is not known. The designs are the same as the currency issues, but without any of the round dots. The straightedged dots appear on the reverse of the single and half size pieces. All the diacritical marks are missing

Many of the diacritical marks are missing *sikka zad bar haft * *kishwar sāya fazl ilāh * *hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs           * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Wt (g) ** 12.45 6.23 **Diam (mm) ** Varies. See table below **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Varies. See table below **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination Diam Edge Comments Rarity **

**4.12 ** Rupee 27.0 P RRR **4.13 ** " 25.0 GL RRR **4.14 ** Half Rupee 24.3 P RRR **4.15 ** " 21.4 GL RRR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Pattern Quarter ** **Rupee - 1793 to 1818 ** All the diacritical marks are missing

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh (= AH 1204 Coin of Shāh 'Ālam Emperor) * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in
the 19 th year) * * **Wt (g) ** 3.07 **Diam (mm) ** Varies. See table below **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Varies. See table below **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination Diam Edge Comments Rarity **

**4.16 ** 357 Quarter Rupee 17.7 P RRR **4.17 ** " 16.3 GL RRR **Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee and  ** **Half Rupee - 1793 to 1818. Mint-name: ** ***Murshīdābād*** ** ** No AH date on the obverse of the rupee and half. The quarter rupee has the fixed AH date 1204 (see next type). *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya *

*fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh * (= Defender
of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs       * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 5.82 **Wt (g) ** 11.61-11.64 5.74-5.82 **Diam (mm) ** 26.6-26.9 21.8-22.2 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. ** **No. ** **Denom Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**4.18 ** Rupee Currency C **4.19 ** " Proof RR --- **4.20 ** Half Rupee Currency Occurs with differing
sized numeral 19 on reverse. One has a triangle of dots above the crescent.

# C

**4.21 ** " Proof RR See also Murshīdābād, Patna and Dakka mints

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Quarter Rupee **

**- 1793 to 1818. Mint-name: ** ***Murshīdābād*** ** **

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh (= AH 1204 Coin of Shāh 'Ālam Emperor) * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in
the 19 th year) * * **Official Wt (g) ** 2.91 **Wt (g) ** 2.88-2.91 **Diam (mm) ** 16.8-17.1 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **4.22 ** Currency Dot in centre group on reverse. Occurs with large and small dates.

# C

**4.24 ** Proof RR See also Murshīdābād, Patna and Dakka mints

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper Wt for Rupee ** **1793 to 1818 ** ***'179 *** **Min. Wt ** **Old Cal. Rup ** ***oblique *** ***milled *** **grs'** An oval circle containing the legend. The weight above and weight units below. Star countermark next to weight numerals. Blank

**Official Wt (g) ** 11.59 (179 grains) **Wt (g) ** 11.49 **Diam (mm) ** 26.5 **Metal ** Copper **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

# 4.25 S

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Copper Patterns for **

**Quarter & Eighth Annas ** Patterns were shown to the Calcutta Council in November 1795, and it was agreed that the inscriptions should be changed. No examples of these patterns have been discovered and their weight and size is not known, although they probably weighed the same as the 1795 coins issued for circulation (11.64 g and 5.85 g). A Persian inscription: *ek pau * *anna* (= quarter of an anna) A Persian inscription: *nīm * *pau anna* (= half a quarter of an anna) * *

*Quarter anna * *Eighth anna * ** ** **Catalogue ** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**4.26 ** - Pice None known N/A **4.27 ** - Half Pice None known N/A

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Copper Pice ** ***et infra*** ** ** **1795-1796 ** * * The value in three languages:

Bengali: e *k pai sikka  * Persian: y *ek pai sikka*

Hindi: e *k pai sikka  * (Translation of all languages = one pai sikka)

*sanah julūs 37 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= in the 37th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam)

**Official Wt (g) ** Varies. See below **Wt (g) ** " **Diam (mm) ** " **Metal ** Copper **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue ** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denom Date ** **Issued ** **Official ** **wt (g) ** **Wt ** **(g) ** **Diam ** **(mm) ** **Comments Rar **

**4.28 ** 203 Pice 1795 11.64 11.66 RR **4.29 ** 204 " 8.73 8.06- 8.91 29.1- 30.1

# C **4.30 ** 211 Half Pice 5.82 5.83 25.2- 25.4

Obv. legend: Half Pie Sicca in three languages.

# RR **4.31 ** 212 " 4.36 4.14- 4.8 23.1- 23.5 Ref: Kaslove, 4.8g; Johnston.

# S
## Murshīdābād Mint

**Murshīdābād Mint - Hammered Coinage - Gold, **

**Shāh 'Ālam II - 1765 to 1768 ** The first gold coins issued from the Murshīdābād mint, under the authority of the British, were minted in 1765 in an attempt to fill the gap left by the scarcity of silver coins (see Calcutta). Some of the Calcutta coins are reputed to be those marked with the letter *C*, but the identity of the Murshīdābād coins is not known. **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.1 ** - - Mohur Fractions may also have been struck.

# N/A

**Murshīdābād Mint - Hammered Coinages - Silver, **

**Shāh 'Ālam II - 1765 to 1777 ** The silver coins issued from the Murshīdābād mint, under the authority of the British from 1765 to 1777, seem to be indistinguishable from coins minted at Calcutta. These are, therefore, only catalogued under Calcutta. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam *

*bādshāh \[AH date\]* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH date\]) *ẓarb mubārak * *murshīdābād sanah \[RY\] *

*julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * **Catalogue** **Cat No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity ** **See ** **Calcutta ** - - Rupee

# N/A

**Murshīdābād Mint - Hammered Coinage - Silver, **

**Shāh 'Ālam II- Arkot Type ** Arkot rupees were issued from the mint at Murshīdābād from time to time. They were presumably identical to those struck at Calcutta and are, therefore, only catalogued under Calcutta.

* * * * *sikka mubārak bādshāh * *ghāzī 'ālamgīr azīz al-dīn *

*muḥammad \[AH date\] * (= the auspicious coin of the
victorious Emperor, 'Ālamgīr chosen of the faith of Muḥammad\[AH date\])

*ẓarb arkāt sanah 6 julūs * *maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Arkot in the 6 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity ** **See ** **Calcutta ** - - Rupee

# N/A

**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Mohur and **

**Half Mohur - 1794 - Wide Border ** A very small number of gold coins were issued from the Murshīdābād mint in 1794. They are identified by the secret marks shown below. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh 1202 * (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah * *19 julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Official Weight (g) ** 12.36 **Actual Weight (g) ** 12.28 **Actual Diameter (mm) ** 26.7-26.8 **Composition ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.2C ** Mohur Wider rim. Dot in centre circle hard to see.

# RRR
**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Mohur and ** **Half Mohur - 1794 - Narrow Border ** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202. * * *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Mohur ** **Half Mohur ** **Official Wt (g) ** 12.36 6.18 **Wt (g) ** 12.29? **Diam (mm) ** 26.0-27.4 ~22 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.2 ** Mohur Dot in centre circle on obverse.

# RR

**5.3 ** Half Mohur RRR See also Calcutta, Patna and Dakka mints

**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Quarter ** **Mohur - 1794 **

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, Coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Official Wt (g) ** 3.09 **Wt (g) ** 3.09-3.11 **Diam (mm) ** 16.3-17.8 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.4 ** No dot in groups of dots on reverse. R See also Calcutta, Patna and Dakka mints

**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinages - Silver Rupee - **

**Wide Border ** The first milled silver rupees issued from the Murshīdābād mint have the date AH 1202 on the obverse. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202. * * *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Official Weight (g) ** 11.64 **Actual Weight (g) ** 11.64 **Actual Diameter (mm) ** 29.7-29.9 **Composition ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right ** ** **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **AH ** **date ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.4A ** 156 1202 Dot in centre circle on obverse. Wide border. First reported by Randy Weir.

# RRR

**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee **

**1793 - Narrow Border ** The first milled silver rupees issued from the Murshīdābād mint have the date AH 1202 on the obverse. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs       * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in --- of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) * * the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 **Wt (g) ** 11.64-11.68 **Diam (mm) ** 29.4-30.1 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. **

| Pr. | No. |
|:--- |:--- |
| AH | date |
| Comments | Rarity |
| 5.5 | 156 1202 Dot in centre circle on obverse. Narrow | **AH ** **date ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.5 ** 156 1202 Dot in centre circle on obverse. Narrow border.

# RR See also Calcutta and Patna Mints

**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee **

***et infra*** ** - 1794 to 1795 ** No AH date. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor,

Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) * * *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 5.82 **Wt (g) ** 11.61-11.64 5.74-5.82 **Diam (mm) ** 26.6-26.9 21.8-22.2 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.6 ** 166 Rupee Dot in centre circle on obverse. N **5.7 ** 167 Half Rupee Not seen by Pridmore. See Falcke (1997), p.14. Also Baldwin (2006), Sale (Stiller), lot 829.

# RR See also Calcutta, Patna & Dakka mints

**Murshīdābād Mint - Milled Coinages - Silver Quarter ** **Rupee - 1794 to 1795 **

* * * * *1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh (= AH 1204 Coin of Shāh 'Ālam Emperor). * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in
the 19 th year). * * **Official Wt (g) ** 2.91 **Wt (g) ** 2.88-2.91 **Diam (mm) ** 16.8-17.1 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. **

**Pr. No. ** **AH  ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.8 ** Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 639. No dot in any of the groups on the reverse.

# RR See also Calcutta, Patna & Dakka mints

## Patna Mint

**Patna (** ***'Azimābād*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - Gold, **

**Shāh 'Ālam II - 1765 to 1768 ** The first gold coins issued from the Patna mint, under the authority of the British, were minted in 1765 in an attempt to fill the gap left by the scarcity of silver coins (see Calcutta). The Calcutta coins are reputed to be those marked with the letter *C*, but the identity of the Patna coins is not known. **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination AH RY Comments Rarity ** **See ** **Calcutta ** - - Mohur Fractions may also have been struck.

# N/A
**Patna (** ***'Azīmābād*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - Gold **

**Mohur ** ***et infra*** ** - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1768 to 1769 ** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad,

Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH\]) *ẓarb 'azīmābād sanah * *\[RY\] julūs maimanat * *mānūs * (= Struck at 'Azīmābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

** ** **Mohur ** **Eighth Mohur ** **Wt (g) ** 11.04- 11.06 0.77

**Diam (mm) ** 12.0 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.10 ** - - Mohur  - - 10 Baldwin et al (2011), New York Sale XXV, Lot 436.

# RRR **5.11 ** - - Eighth Mohur  - - RRR

**Patna (** ***'Azimābād*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - Gold **

**Mohur ** ***et infra*** ** - Shah Alam - 1769 to 1770 ** The intermediate style of gold coin was issued from the Patna mint in RY 10 and 11 of Shāh 'Ālam. The coins had some characteristics of the Murshīdābād *sicca*, but retained the mintname *'* *Azīmābād*. Note the heavier weight. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow *ẓarb 'azīmābād sanah \[RY\] *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at 'Azīmābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\])

** ** **Mohur ** **¼ Mohur ** **1** **/** **16** ** Mohur ** **Wt (g) ** 12.33 3.1 0.77 (from Pr) **Diam (mm) ** 22.8-23.1 ~15 ~12 (from Pr) **Metal ** Gold **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denom AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.11C ** - - Mohur 1182 10
RRR **5.12 ** - - "  1183 10 **5.12A ** - - Quarter Mohur

# 1182 10 RRR **5.13 ** - - "  1183 11 Ref: S. Bhandare (2010), p. 31. **5.14 ** Sixteenth Mohur

# 1182 10 BM RRR

**Patna (** ***'Azīmābād*** **) Mint - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - Hammered ** **Coinage - Silver Rupee 1765 to 1769 **

*Sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī ud-dīn muḥammad. *

*shāh 'ālam. bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\]) *ẓarb 'Azīmābād sanah * *\[RY\] julūs maimanat * *mānūs* (= Struck at 'Azīmābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

** ** **Rupee ** **½ Rupee ** **¼ ** **Rupee ** **1** **/** **8** ** ** **Rupee **

**1** **/** **16** ** ** **Rupee ** **Official Wt ** **(g) ** 11.64? 5.82 2.91 1.45 0.73

**Wt (g) ** 11.29-11.54 5.74? 1.42 0.74 **Diam (mm) ** 22.7-25.0 19-0- 19.4 ~15 11.3- 11.5 9.0-9.5 **Metal ** Silver **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denom ** **AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.15 ** - - Rupee  1178 6 Ref: Baldwin (2001), Sale 25 (Wiggins), Lot 593.

# R

**5.16 ** " 1179 7 R **5.17 ** " 1180 8 R **5.18 ** - - "  1181 8 Ref: Baldwin (2002), Sale 31, Lot 704.

# R **5.19 ** " 1181 9 R **5.20 ** " 1182 9 R **5.21 ** " xxxx 10 R
**5.21C ** - - ½ Rupee xxxx 8  RRR **5.22 ** - - "  xxxx 9 Reported by Nick Rhodes, 2006.

# RRR **5.23 ** - - "  xxxx 10 Reported by Nick Rhodes, Sept 2006.

# RRR **5.24 ** - - Quarter Rupee xxxx 7 Reported by Nick Rhodes, Dec 2008.

# RRR **5.25 ** - - Eighth Rupee
xxxx 7 Reported by Hemanth Chopra, but date not visible.

# RRR **5.26 ** - - Sixteenth Rupee xxxx 7 Reported by Hemanth Chopra.

# RRR

**Patna ('Azimābād) Mint - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - Hammered **

**Coinages - Silver Rupee 1771 to 1773 ** Like the gold coins, the intermediate style of silver coins was issued in RY 10 & 11. The coins had the moon on the obverse and the flower on the reverse, in imitation of Murshīdābād *siccas*, but retained the mint-name *'Azīmābād*. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh  * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of
the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\]) *ẓarb 'azīmābād sanah \[RY\] *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at ''Azīmābād in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Wt (g) ** 11.50-11.58 **Diam (mm) ** 24.0-25.5 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. No. AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.27 ** - - 1183 10 Ref: Nick Rhodes from photo from a collector in India.

# RRR

**5.27A ** - - 1183 11 ***Nazarana***.  Ashmolean Museum.

# RRR

# 5.28 1183 11 RR **Patna Mint - Hammered Coinage - Silver, **

**Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II, 1770 to 1772 ** The silver coins issued from the Patna mint, under the authority of the British from 1770 to 1772, seem to be indistinguishable from the coins minted at Calcutta.

**Patna Mint (** ***'Azimābād*** **) - Milled Coinage - Gold Mohur ** **- Wide Border ** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya *

*fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh * (= Defender
of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow
of the divine favour, put his stamp on seven climes, 1202) * * *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Official Weight (g) ** 12.36 **Actual Weight (g) ** 12.35 **Actual Diameter (mm) ** 27.1-27.5 **Composition ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right ** ** **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denom ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.30 ** - - Mohur Ref:  Baldwin (2000), Sale (Wheeler), Lot 137. Wide border. Dot in right circle of dots on obverse.

# RRR

**Patna Mint ('Azimābād) - Milled Coinage - Gold ** **Mohur and Half Mohur - Narrow Border ** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) * * *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Mohur ** **Half Mohur ** **Official Wt (g) ** 12.36 6.18 **Wt (g) ** 12.35 6.17 **Diam (mm) ** 27.1-27.5 ~22 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right --- **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.29 ** Mohur Dot in right circle of dots on obverse.

# RR

**5.31 ** Half Mohur Ref: Baldwin (2000), Sale 22 (Wheeler), Lot 136.

# RRR

See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād and Dakka mints

**Patna Mint (** ***'Azimābād*** **) - Milled Coinage - Gold ** **Quarter Mohur - Shah Alam - 1795-1796 **

* * * * *1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, Coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Official Wt (g) ** 3.09 **Wt (g) **? **Diam (mm) ** ~17 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.32 ** None traced. Dot in left group of dots on reverse.

# N/A

See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād and Dakka mints

**Patna Mint (** ***'Azimābād*** **) - Milled Coinage -  **

**Silver Rupee** *** *** **- Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1793 ** Dated AH 1202. The first milled silver coins issued from the Patna mint have the AH date, 1202, on the obverse. Pridmore assigned the coins with this secret mark (dot in right-hand circle) to the Dakka mint, but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com> for the reasons for changing this. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * * of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202.

**Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 **Wt (g) ** 11.63 **Diam (mm) ** 29.3-29.6 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.33 ** 155 Rupee Dot in right circle on obverse.

# R See also Calcutta and Murshīdābād

**Patna Mint (** ***'Azimābād*** **) - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee **

**and Half Rupee - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1794 to 1796 ** Later silver coins did not have the AH date on the obverse, except the quarter rupee. Pridmore assigned the coins with this secret mark to the Dakka mint, but see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com> for the reasons for changing this. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya *

*fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad * *shāh 'ālam bādshāh * (= Defender
of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 5.82 **Wt (g) ** 11.48-11.58 5,75 **Diam (mm) ** 26.3-27.1 22.2-22.3 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.34 ** 163 Rupee Dot in right circle on obverse. RR **5.35 ** 164 Half Rupee RR See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād & Dakka mints
**Patna Mint (** ***'Azimābād*** **) - Milled Coinage - Silver **

**Quarter Rupee - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1794 to 1796 **

* * * * *1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh (= AH 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam Emperor) * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in
the 19 th year) * * **Official Wt (g) ** 2.91 **Wt (g) **? **Diam (mm) ** ~17 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.36 ** Dot in left group on reverse. RR See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād & Dakka mints

**Patna Mint (** ***'Azimābād*** **), Copper - 1794 ** The Patna assay master produced copper coins as a trial in 1794, but the identity is not known. He may well have used the existing rupee dies.

* * *Possible design for Blake's copper coins struck at Patna * **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.37 ** - - Pice  Blake (mint master) made a trial of 10 maunds of copper in 1794 - probably about 2,500 copper coins in 1794. None known so far.

# N/A

## Dakka Mint

**Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - **

**Gold Mohur - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1769 to 1773 **

Not certain of script arrangement. May be like silver?

**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.38 ** - - None traced. Ref: Pr. p. 234.  N/A

**Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - **

**Silver Rupee ** ***et infra*** ** - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1765 to 1769 ** A half rupee probably exists, but has not yet been discovered. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\]) *ẓarb Jahāngīrnagar sanah *

*\[RY\] sicca \[mubārak\] * *julūs maimanat mānūs * (=

The \[auspicious\] coin struck at Jahāngīrnagar in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) **Rupee ** **Quarter ** **Rupee ** **Eighth ** **Rupee ** **Sixteenth **

**Rupee ** **Wt (g) ** 11.60 2.87? 0.70 **Diam ** **(mm) ** 20.6- 21.3 14.0-14.5 ~11 8.6-9.4 **Metal ** Silver **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denom ** **AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.39 ** - - Rupee

# RR **5.39C ** - - "

RR **5.40 ** - - "  RR **5.41 ** - - "  1182 10 Ref: Baldwin (2002), Sale 31, Lot 710; Baldwin (2003), Sale 33, Lot 1007. Both appear to  show the same coin.

# RR **5.42 ** - - Quarter Rupee \[xxxx\] 7 RR **5.43 ** - - "  \[xxxx\] 8 Ref: HK/Singapore (2003), Sale 36, Lot 467.

# RR

**5.44 ** - - "  \[xxxx\] 10 Ref: HK/Singapore (2002), Sale 35, Lot 703.

# RR **5.45 ** - - Eighth Rupee 117x 6 Ref: Nick Rhodes (2006).

# RR **- ** - - " \[xxxx\] 7 Ref: Dealer in India
via Nick Rhodes, but not certain if date is 7 or 8.

# RR **5.46 ** - - "  \[xxxx\] 8 Ref: HK/Singapore (2003), Sale 36, Lot 467.

# RR **5.47 ** - - " \[1\] 9 Ref: Nick Rhodes, also Ashmolean Museum.

# RR **5.48 ** - - Sixteenth Rupee \[xxxx\] 7 Ref: HK/Singapore

(2003), Sale 36, Lot 467, but I think this might be RY 8. The

# RR
photo looks upsidedown. See next coin. **5.49 ** - - "  \[xxxx\] 8 Ref: HK/Singapore (2002), Sale 35, Lot 703.

# RR

**Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - **

**Silver Rupee - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1769-1770 ** As with Patna, Dakka appears to have changed the style of the rupee to look more like that of Murshīdābād, before finally starting to produce more precise copies of the Murshīdābād *sicca*. Only coins of RY 10 are known and they show half a sun and a moon on the obverse and a flower on the reverse, but retain the mint-name *Jahāngīrnagar*. A *nazarana* rupee in the BM shows just a moon on the obverse, more like the Murshīdābād coins. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes,

# \[AH\])

*ẓarb Jahāngīrnagar sanah * *\[RY\] julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Jahāngīrnagar in the \[RY\] year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Wt (g) ** 11.57 **Diam (mm) ** 21.2-21.6 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.50 ** - - 1183 10 Different  style from previous type.

# RRR

**5.51 ** 1183 10 ***Nazarana***. BM. Moon on obverse.

# RRR **Dakka Mint - Hammered Coinage - Silver, **

**Shāh 'Ālam II - 1770 to 1772 ** The silver coins issued from the Dakka mint, under the authority of the British from 1770 to 1772, seem to be indistinguishable from coins minted at Calcutta (see Calcutta).

**Dakka (** ***Jahāngirnagar*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - **

**Gold Mohur - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1782 ** The Dakka mint was briefly re-opened in 1782 and a few gold coins were produced. They probably had the mint-name *Jahāngīrnagar * and the fixed RY 19. Other than that, the design and dates are not known. **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. **

**Pr. No. ** **AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.52 ** - - 1198? 19? No coins known.  N/A

**Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar*** **) Mint - Hammered Coinage - **

**Silver Rupee - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1782 ** As with the gold, the design and dates are not known. They probably have the mint-name *Jahāngīrnagar* and the fixed RY19. **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. No. AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.53 ** - - 1198? 19? No coins known.  N/A **Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar*** **) Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold ** **Mohur and Half Mohur - 1794 to 1796 ** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh 1202* (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah * *19 julūs maimanat mānūs * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Mohur ** **Half Mohur ** **Official Wt (g) ** 12.36 6.18 **Wt (g) **?? **Diam (mm) ** ~26.7 ~21.7 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denom AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.54 ** 74 Mohur 1202 19 Ref: Baldwin (2000), Sale

22 (Wheeler), Lot 143. Dot in left circle of dots on the obverse.

# RRR

**5.55 ** 75 ½ Mhr. 1202 19 None traced. N/A See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād and Patna mints

**Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar*** **) Mint - Milled Coinages -  ** **Gold Quarter Mohur - 1794 to 1796 ** No photo available No photo available

* * * * *1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Official Wt (g) ** 3.09 **Wt (g) **? **Diam (mm) ** ~16.8 **Metal ** Gold **Edge ** Grained Right
**Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.56 ** None traced. Dot in right dot group on reverse.

# N/A

See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād and Patna mints

**Dakka (** ***Jahangirnagar)*** ** Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver ** **Rupee and Half Rupee - 1794 to 1796 ** *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh  * (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs  * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Official Wt (g) ** 11.64 5.82 **Wt (g) ** 11.40-11.50 5.66 **Diam (mm) ** 25.9-26.8 21.6-22.1 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.57 ** 169 Rupee Dot in left circle on obverse. RR **5.58 ** 170 Half Rupee RR See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād and Patna mints

**Dakka (Jahangirnagar) Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver ** **Quarter Rupee - 1794 to 1796 **

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh (= AH 1204 Coin of Shāh 'Ālam Emperor) * *

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in
the 19 th year) * * **Official Wt (g) ** 2.91 **Wt (g) ** 2.84-2.87 **Diam (mm) ** 16.6-17.5 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **AH ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.59 ** 171 1204 Dot in right group on reverse. RR See also Calcutta, Murshīdābād and Patna mints

## Cuttack

**Cuttack Mint, Copper ** A pattern copper coin was struck at Cuttack in 1804 by a representative of the EIC. No examples are known (see <https://www.psIndianCoins.com).> Figure of Jagannath Value in Persian & Oriah
and date **Wt (g) **? **Diam (mm) **? **Metal ** Copper **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.60 ** - - Pice?  No specimen traced. RRR

## Tripura

**Tripura Mint, Shah ** **'** ** Alam II - Silver 1761 ** * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh \[AH\]* (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, \[AH\])

*ẓarb rūshanābād tiprah * *sanah 3 julūs maimanat *

*mānūs * (= Struck at Rūshanābād Tripura in the 3 rd year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

**Wt (g) ** 11.49 **Diam (mm) ** ~30 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. **

**KM RB Denom AH RY ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**5.61 ** 511 248 Rupee 1175 3 Only one known at present, in the Ashmolean Museum.

# RRR
## Garhwal **Garhwal Mint, Copper ** * * * * *mulk (angrez) kampanī bahādur*

(= the dominion of the victorious (East India) Company) * * *ẓarb srīnagar sambat *

$$ 1872... (= struck at $$ Srināgar, sambat year

1872...) **Wt (g) ** 4.29 **Diam (mm) ** ~20-21 **Metal ** Copper **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No. KM Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **5.62 ** - - Takka

# RRR

## Calcutta Mint, c. 1800 to c. 1830

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Gold Mohur &  **

**Half Mohur - Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1819 ** See earlier section for gold coins struck between 1800 and 1818. In 1819, the fineness of the coins was reduced and the weight increased, so that the coins contained the same amount of gold. The edges are straight-grained. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Alma

Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Mohur ** **Half Mohur ** **Official Wt (g) ** 13.36 6.63 **Wt (g) ** 13.28 6.64 **Diam (mm) ** 28.3-28.8 23.2-23.4 **Metal ** Gold (91.7%) **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**6.1 ** 77 Mohur Currency S **6.2 ** 78 " Proof RR **6.3 ** 79 Half Mohur Currency S **6.4 ** 80 " Proof RR **Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Quarter Mohur ** **- Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1819 **

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Official Wt (g) ** 3.31 **Wt (g) ** 3.31 **Diam (mm) ** 18.0-18.1 **Metal ** Gold (91.7%) **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**6.5 ** 81 Quarter Mohur Currency S **6.6 ** 82 " Proof RR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Gold Mohur - **

**Shāh ** **'** **Ālam II - 1825 to 1835 ** In 1825, the fineness of the gold coins was increased to that of the coins issued before 1818. The weight was accordingly reduced and the coins given an edge grained-left. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * bādshāh 1202 (= Defender of
the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes, 1202.

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah * *19 julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *
**Official Wt (g) ** 12.36 **Wt (g) ** 12.37 **Diam (mm) ** 26.6-26.8 **Metal ** Gold (99.2%) **Edge ** Grained Left **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Status ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**6.7 ** 83 Currency See Todywala (2010), Sale 49, Lot

214. Wt = 12.32 g for a silver trial? Not sure of the authenticity.

# S **6.8 ** - - Copper Trial?

Copper trial striking. Possibly for new steam-driven machinery? Ref: Baldwin (2010), Sale 68, Lot 4263. $$ Wt = 6.33 g. $$

# RR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Pattern Rupee **

A pattern probably prepared in 1818 as an example of a coin bearing European style emblems. Arms of the Company
within a plain circle, Surrounded by the legend. *AUSPICIO. REGIS. ET. *

*SENATUS. ANGLIAE:* (Under the auspices of the King and Parliament of

England). All within a raised, toothed border. The legend in English and

Persian: *ẓarb kalkata* (= Struck at Calcutta):

# CALCUTTA

# RUPEE All within an open wreath of palm branches. All surrounded by a raised,
toothed rim. **Official Wt (g) ** 11.65 **Wt (g) ** 28.7 **Pridmore Diam (mm) ** 28.7 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **6.9 ** RRR

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Silver, Initial Issue of **

**1819 - Mint-Name ** ***Murshīdābād*** ** ** In 1819, new silver coins of lower standard and higher weight were issued. They have straight-grained edges. The early issues lack the star below *bād* of *bādshāh * at centre left on the obverse and have a larger diameter. * * * * *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Official Wt (g) ** 12.43 **Wt (g) ** 12.40 **Diam (mm) ** 28.4-28.9 **Metal ** Silver (91.7%) **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **6.10 ** R

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinages - Silver Rupee &  **

**Half Rupee 1819 - Mint-Name: ** ***Murshīdābād*** ** ** Star below *bad* at left on the obverse. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar sāya * *fazl ilāh hāmī dīn muḥammad *

*shāh 'ālam bādshāh  * (= Defender of the religion of

Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Murshīdābād in the 19 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Official Wt (g) ** 12.43 6.21 **Wt (g) ** 12.27-12.44 6.09-6.20 **Diam (mm) ** 26.5-26.8 23.8-24.0 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Denom ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**6.11 ** 172 Rupee No letter *S* on reverse. N **6.12 ** - - Trial  Striking?

Overstruck on an Ottoman Maḥmūd II silver 5-Qurush. Ref: HK/Sing. (1995), Sale 25, Lot 673.

# RRR

**6.13 ** 176 Rupee Tiny letter *S* on top left of reverse. One with lion countermarks.

# S **6.15 ** 173 Half Rupee No star below *bād.* N
*Cat No 6.13 with small lion countermarks at bottom left and * *bottom of obverse *

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Quarter Rupee **

**1819 - Mint-Name: ** ***Murshīdābād*** ** **

*1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb murshīdābād sanah 19 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 19)

**Official Wt (g) ** 3.11 **Wt (g) ** 3.11-3.13 **Diam (mm) ** 18.7-19.1 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. **

**Denomination Edge ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**6.16 ** 174 Quarter Rupee SG Dot in second group of dots. Pr. Sale Lot 617.

# RR **6.17 ** 175 " SG No dot privy mark. See
photos. Comes with tall and short date (R. Weir).

# N

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper Weight for ** **Rupee - 1819 to 1833 **

**'Min. wt. ** **new Cal. Rup. ** **straight-milled ** ***and plain edged'*** *** ***

An oval circle containing the legend. The weight above and the weight units below. NB star at bottom. Blank

**Official Wt (g) ** 12.31 (190 grains) **Wt (g) ** 12.26 **Diam (mm) ** 26.5 **Metal ** Copper **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat No. Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **6.20 ** S

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee 1817 to **

**1819 - Mint-Name:** *** Farrukhābād*** ** ** Struck at the mints of Farrukhābād and Calcutta. The mints are identified by tiny privy marks. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh. * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of
the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity)

No photo found. The photo above is a Farrukhābād mint rupee. The Calcutta mint coin would have an inverted *v * at the lower right of the obverse.

**Official Wt (g) ** 11.21 **Wt (g) ** ~11.2 **Diam (mm) ** ~25.5 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Grained Right

| Catalogue | Cat | No. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Pr. No. | Comments | Rarity |
| 6.21 | RR | See also Farrukhābād mint | **Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **6.21 ** RR See also Farrukhābād mint **Privy Marks ** * * *Inverted V for Calcutta Mint * * * *Bead for Farrukhābād Mint *
**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Rupee &  ** **Half Rupee 1820 to 1831 - Mint-Name: ** ***Farrukhābād*** ** ** This issue differs from the previous one because of the edge and slightly increased weight. Struck at Farrukhābād, Calcutta, Banāras and Saugor. *sikka zad bar haft kishwar *

*sāya fazl ilāh hāmī dīn * *muḥammad shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh * (= Defender of the religion of Muḥammad, Shāh 'Ālam Emperor, Shadow of
the divine favour, put his stamp on the seven climes) *ẓarb farruckābād sanah 45 *

*julūs maimanat mānūs* (= Struck at Farrukhābād in the 45 th year of his reign of tranquil prosperity) * *

**Rupee ** **Half Rupee ** **Official Wt (g) ** 11.68 5.84 **Wt (g) ** 11.41-11.57 5.78 **Diam (mm) ** 25.4-26.3 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Straight Grained **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. **

**Pr. No. Denomination ** **Comments ** **Rarity **

**6.22 ** Rupee C **6.23 ** Half Rupee S See also Farrukhābād, Banāras and Saugor mints. **Privy Marks ** *Calcutta Rupee and Half, * *Obverse. Inverted V *

*Calcutta Rupee and Half, * *Reverse. No Dot in Circle *

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Silver Quarter Rupee **

**1820 to 1831 - Mint-Name: ** ***Farrukhābād*** ** ** This issue differs from the previous one because of the increased weight. Struck at Farrukhābād, Calcutta, Banāras and Saugor.

* * * * *1204 sikka shāh 'ālam * bādshāh ghāzī (= 1204, coin of Shāh 'Ālam the victorious Emperor)

*ẓarb farrukhābād sanah 45 * (= Struck at Murshīdābād in year 45)

**Official Wt (g) ** 2.92 **Wt (g) ** 2.91 **Diam (mm) ** 15.6-16.9 **Metal ** Silver **Edge ** Straight Grained

**Catalogue** **Cat No. ** **Pr. No. ** **Comments ** **Rarity ** **6.24 **

C See also Farrukhābād, Banāras and Saugor mints. **Privy Marks **

*Calcutta Quarter Rupee. Obverse. Inverted V *

**Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper Pice ** ***et infra*** ** - 1800 to 1831 **

*sanah julūs 37 shāh 'ālam * *bādshāh* (= in the 37th year of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam) The value in three
languages: Bengali: e *k pai sikka. * Persian: y *ek pai sikka.* Hindi: e *k pai sikka. *

(Translation of all languages = One pai sikka). All within a plain, raised
rim **Official Wt (g) ** Varies. See below **Wt (g) ** " **Diam (mm) ** " **Metal ** Copper **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. ** **Pr. ** **No. ** **Date ** **Issued ** **Status Official ** **wt (g) ** **Wt ** **(g) ** **Diam ** **(mm) ** **Comments Rarity ** **6.26 ** 205 1809 " 6.54 6.57 25.8- 25.9

# C

**6.27 ** 206 1817 " 6.47 6.06 27.2- Round flans S
## 27.5 **6.28 ** 207 1829 " " 6.10-

## 6.43

## 25.9

## 26.3

Very neat flans. See below for an example in pewter.

# C

## 6.29 208 Proof " RRR

## An example in pewter. Photo from Barbara Mears.

## Could this be genuine or concocted for collectors?

## Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage - Copper,

## Square Pattern/Trial Pice - 1807

The legend on these coins is not known but probably the same as that on the round copper pice, but struck on a square flan.

## Catalogue **Cat ** **No. **

## Pr. **No. **

## Date **Issued **

## Status **Comments ** **Rarity **

## 6.30 - - Pattern or

## Trial None known to exist. N/A

## Calcutta Mint - Milled Coinage Tola Weights

## Tola **Half ** **Tola **

## ¼ Tola

## Wt (g)

11.51 5.81 2.79-2.91 **Diam (mm) ** 26.5 22.9 16.3-16.6 **Metal ** Copper **Edge ** Plain **Catalogue** **Cat ** **No. **

## Pr. **No. **

## Denomination Axis **Comments ** **Rarity **

** ** - - Tola  S ** ** - - Half Tola  ** ** - - Quarter Tola  ↑↑ ** ** - - Quarter Tola  ↑↓ **Abbreviations ** BM British Museum DNW Dix Noonan Webb KM *Standard Catalog of World Coins* LMC Brown, *Catalogue of Coins in the Provincial Museum * *Lucknow * Pr Pridmore, *The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations * *Part 4 India Vol. I* *** *** RB Rhodes and Bose, *The Coinage of Tripura* SCMB *Seaby's Coins & Medal Bulletin * SNC *Spinks Numismatic Circular* ** **

**Bibliography ** Bhandare, S., 2010, 'Important Indian coins in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna', JONS 205, pp. 22-33.

Brown, C.J., 1920, *Catalogue of Coins in the Provincial Museum * *Lucknow*, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Falcke, G., 1997, 'Three Indian Items', *ONSNL* 151, p. 14.

Kathotia, I.K., 2006, 'A newly discovered copper ticket from Bengal',

# JONS 188, p. 23.

KM Standard Catalog of World Coins, various catalogues, Krause Publications, Iola.

Kulkarni, P., 2003-2004, 'Some Unreported East India Company Coins', *Numismatic Digest*, Vol 27-28, pp. 113-118.

Mitchiner, M., 1979, *Non-Islamic States & Western Colonies*, B.A. Seaby, London.

Pridmore, F., 1975, *The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations *

*Part 4 India Volume I East India Company Presidency Series*, Spink & Son, London.

Pridmore, F., 1978, *Spinks Numismatic Circular*, LXXXVI, p. 68.

Pridmore Sale, 18-19 October 1982, Glendining & Co., London.

Rhodes, N.G., 1999, 'The First E.I.C. Copper Coins for Bengal', *ONS * *Newsletter* 159, pp. 15-16.

Rhodes, N.G., and Bose, S.K., 2002, *The Coinage of Tripura. With notes *

*on the Seals, Orders, Decorations and Medals of the State, * Mira Bose, Calcutta. *Seaby's Coins & Medal Bulletin*, London.

Skelton, H.P., 1862, *New Illustrated Manual of the Current Gold and *

*silver Coins of all Civilized Nations, * James Hagger, London. *Spinks Numismatic Circular*, London.

Stevens, P., 2012, *The Coinage of the Hon. East India Company: Part I *

*The Coins of the Bengal Presidency*, Baldwin's & Sons, London.

Stevens, P., 2017, *The Coins of the English East India Company. *

*Presidency Series - A Catalogue and Pricelist*, Spink & Son, London. Stevens, P., <https://www.psIndianCoins.com.>

Weir, R., <https://www.randyweirnumismatics.com.>

Wodak, E., 1958, *Spinks Numismatic Circular*, LXVI, p. 62. Zambaur, E.V., * NS* XXI, New York. Zeno.ru Oriental Coins Database, www,zeno.ru.
**BOOK REVIEW ** ** ** ***Ancient Indian Coins: A Comprehensive Catalogue*** ** ** **by Wilfried Pieper ** ** ** **IIRNS Publications, Mumbai, 2021 ** **Hardcover, vii + 656 pages ** ** **

** ** This is an important compilation that brings together all the recent discoveries of ancient Indian coinage with the various series that had so far been documented but scattered across different catalogues and publications. The signal contribution of this long-awaited book is that rather than the multitude of publications that a numismatist or collector had to consult, this provides the exciting prospect of having just one book encapsulating the coinage of India till 600 CE.

Wilfried Pieper is well-equipped for the role. His earlier books, *Ancient Indian Coins* (with Bopearachchi in 1991) and *Ancient Indian Coins Revisited* (2013) were preambles to the task. We now have the present addition which is the result of eight years of compilation. It follows in the tradition of the earlier catalogues of Cunningham (1891), Allan (1936) and Mitchiner (1978). The observant reader will have noticed that these catalogues have been published every 40 years or so, each bringing our numismatic knowledge up to speed with the developments since the previous publication. Pieper's effort, coming as it is 40 years after MItchiner's, is a worthy addition to this pantheon. It lists 3,792 coins compared to the 1,329 in his 2013 book. However, it should be pointed out that these 3,792 are not 3,792 different types or varieties of coins. Pieper has listed a few specimens each for most types, so the number of coin types would be less. Nevertheless, this is a useful tool for collectors who wish to update their Mitchiners. The plus point of this book is its detailed index, which makes it easy to search for a particular ruler or series.

There are, however niggling areas where this book could have done better. First of all, and this is the biggest disappointment, the coin photos are printed in black and white. The high-quality paper and binding is let down by the black and white printing, especially when most of the listed coins are in copper and lead, which do not reveal much detail in monotone. Even our Journal is in colour and there is a good reason for that: coins look far better in colour and their details are clearer.

Secondly, this catalogue is not comprehensive, despite Pieper's best efforts. There are several coins and rulers that have been missed, partly because this book has reportedly been delayed a few years, thereby missing at least 3 years of discoveries in Indian numismatics. There are also some coins that have already been published in the past that have not been included in this catalogue. Take, for instance, the coins of the

Mitras of ancient Punjab. Pieper has included the well-known copper coins of the Mitra rulers (pp. 196-197), published earlier by Allan, but makes no mention of their lead coins. The first lead coin of this dynasty was published by Devendra Handa in 2015 ( *JONS * Vol. 223, pp. 23-24).

In addition, there are some mistakes in attributions. For instance, Pieper places a *damaru* -shaped coin (no. 1098) in the Kausambi section when it is actually a Mandsaur issue. He also jumbles up the primary and secondary series of Panchala coins together, as though these coins were issued by the same rulers, when it is clear that the secondary series (nos. 1345, 1347, 1348, 1353-1355 and 1358) was issued by a related dynasty probably in southern Panchala, distinct from the main series issued in northern Panchala centred at Ahichchhatra. I also have to point out that the coin illustrated by Pieper of a new king "Bhadramitra" (no. 1331) is actually a coin of a known king, Bhanumitra. Also, the so-called 'Flower type' of Rajgir (no. 1401. is not a coin at all - it is actually a piece of modern  jewellery, with one of the loops still visible (Fig. 1).

*Fig. 1. Copper pendant, misattributed as coin of Rajgir *

*(no. 1401) * Pieper is strongest in his specialisation areas of Ujjain, Malwa and the Narmada Valley (pp. 118-143). The chapters on Vidarbha, Satavahana coins and Vishnukundin coins also provide a rich source of information. Collectors of south Indian coins will find the separate chapters on the Pallavas, Cheras, Cholas, Malayaman and Pandya coins particularly useful. The book also features detailed chapters on the Paratarajas, Western Kshatrapas and Guptas, by contributing authors Pankaj Tandon, Alex Fishman and Sanjeev Kumar respectively. In the Gupta chapter, there is one error which I must correct: the so-called coin of Srigupta (no. 3527) has been misread - it is actually a late posthumous issue of Skandagupta issued two centuries later (Fig. 2).

*Fig. 2. Posthumous issue of Skandagupta, misread as Srigupta *

*(no. 3527) * The final chapter on Post-Gupta coinage is important as this period is often overlooked and this chapter puts a lot of material forward for research.

I am sure that much of the lacunae mentioned above will be corrected with an updated second edition printed in colour. In the meantime, I would certainly recommend every collector of ancient Indian coins to get a copy. This book makes it much easier to navigate the rich and varied numismatic history of the Indian subcontinent. Karan Singh ** **
**ONS NEWS ** **Measuring the Society in 2021: Results of the ONS Member ** **Survey ** The Society ran an online survey in November to gauge the current goals and interests of our members. I created an 11question survey using Google Forms and requested each Regional Secretary to make their members aware of it. We received 131 responses. All but two of these responses came online via Google Forms - two members in the UK section responded via hardcopy paper forms.

The response rate was high in most sections. The South Asia section had the highest rate with 53%, followed by North America at 46%. The UK and General sections had response rates of 37 and 38%. Pakistan (9% - 1 response) and Europe (5% - 11 responses) responded at the lowest rate. It is likely that the  European rate is low because only half of that section can be contacted by email, and because there was no notice of the survey in the Journal. Future surveys will be announced in advance in the Journal, so that all sections can be represented.

This is our first survey, and thus we cannot make claims that things are getting better or worse.

90% of the respondents are active members. The other 10% must be either former members who are still interested or prospective newcomers who follow us on our Facebook pages. 45% of respondents have been members for more than a decade. Only 5% (7 people) in their first year of membership responded, which suggests we did not acquire many new members during the pandemic.

72% of us consider ourselves to be collectors. 50% of respondents are scholars. 7% are part of the business end of numismatics (the question asked "dealers, auction house staff, or mint personnel") and 3% are library or institutional.

Most respondents (73%) learnt about the Society by word of mouth or at conferences. 13% learnt about it from social media, presumably our Facebook pages.

Only 15% of members attend more than one ONS meeting a year, 24% attend once a year, and 17% attend less than that (the North America section had the most respondents and we only meet once a year). Unfortunately, the largest segment, 44%, have never attended a meeting.

75% (95 respondents) are very likely to continue with the ONS. 10% of responders (who are members) are not likely to renew their membership. Yet 95% of respondents would recommend us to others, suggesting people approve of our organisation even if they have issues with their own membership.

87% prefer to hear about us via email, while 6% prefer Facebook and 6% prefer to be notified through the Journal. However, the survey was computer-based and it is likely that all the non-computer people prefer traditional communications. Of the two people who responded by hardcopy, 50% (1 person) prefer to be notified through the Journal. The other hardcopy respondent reminded us that *JONS* notices of meetings often arrive too late to attend. Members' numismatic interests are: In the Journal, members hope to see:

Many respondents personalised this question with their own suggestions, and these have been forwarded to the Editor and the ONS Council. Although the 'winners' in this topic are scholarly articles and new discoveries, the other categories show there is broad interest in many topics. I encourage anyone with knowledge to share to consider submitting a piece to the Journal.

What do members get back from the Society in exchange for our dues? The Journal was rated the most valuable member benefit, with an amazing 96% appreciating it.  47% appreciated communication and fellowship with other members. 46% enjoy the Zoom meetings. Zoom appreciation is significantly higher than the 36% who find in-person meetings valuable. 24 members (19%) appreciate the ONS coin auction - or perhaps wish for an auction, as many who selected "auction" come from sections that do not hold auctions.

We also asked about the word 'Oriental' in the name of the Society. About 1/4 of respondents indicated that they were uncomfortable with this word. Long-time (5+ years) members had the lowest discomfort (15%), with new members (43%) and non-members (46%) having the highest level of discomfort.

Among the various regions, members of the South Asia section were most uncomfortable (30%), 18% of North America members and 17% of UK members expressed concern.  None of the other sections had more than one member expressing concern.

A note on methodology biases: all calculations assume no one voted more than once, and that everyone told the truth about their membership. 44% of respondents belonged to the North America section. These, along with South Asia members (21%), make up the bulk of the respondents.  The UK section printed physical surveys for those without online access, but the other sections did not, thus users without computers are underrepresented. Ed Snible 71% 64% 33% 16% 24% 19% 47% 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% Ancient and pre-Islamic... Hammered Medieval... Machine struck /... Medals Tokens Paper money Books 76% 50% 28% 46% 76% 45% 41% 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Scholarly articles Book reviews Reports of ONS meetings Introductory articles on... New discoveries in... History of numismatics Reports on counterfeits
***Officers of the Oriental Numismatic Society ***

**Secretary General**:  Pankaj Tandon, ptandon@bu.edu

**Deputy Secretary General**:  Joe Cribb, joecribb@btinternet.com ** **

**Editor**:  Karan Singh, editor.jons@gmail.com **  **

**Treasurer**:  Ashok Jain, ashokjainlondon@gmail.com

**E-Communications Secretary**:  Ed Snible, esnible@acm.org **Regional Secretaries: **

***General*** *:  * J. Mark Ritchie, gensect@orientalnumismaticsociety.org

***Europe*** *:  * Patrick Pasmans, parthianstudies@hotmail.com

***U.K. & Eire*** *:*  Helen Wang, hwang@britishmuseum.org

***North America*** *:*  Michael J. Connor, ons.america@gmail.com

***South Asia*** *:  * Mohit Kapoor, reg.sec@ons-sa.org

***Pakistan*** *:  * Haroon Tareen, haroon.t@gmail.com

***China*** *:*  Dai Jianbing, ** ** hebeinu@126.com

The Journal of the Oriental Numismatic Society is an international peer-reviewed journal that is published quarterly.

**Editorial Committee:  ** Joe Cribb, Pankaj Tandon, and Shailendra Bhandare ** ** ** **

Annual Subscription:  UK  £25; rest of Europe  €30; American continent  $35
for other areas please consult the appropriate Regional Secretary

**Website**:  <https://www.orientalnumismaticsociety.org>

*Printed by Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, U.K. *