# No.209

# Autumn 2011 Journal of the Oriental Numismatic Society

# ISSN 1818-1252

# Editor: Stan Goron, Croydon, Surrey, UK en¢i: 7s

Assistant Editor: Robert Bracey, Dept. of Coins & Medals, British Museum, London WC1B 3DG, UK xy

## ONS News Obituaries

The Keeper of the Coins and Medals department at the Fitzwilliam

'Museum, Dr Mark Blackburn, died of cancer on 1 September.

Mark was born on 5 January 1953, in Camberley, Surrey, and
attended the Skinners' School in Tunbridge Wells, Kent. He
graduated in jurisprudence from the University of Oxford (St Edmunds Hall, 1975) and then trained and worked as a barrister at the Middle Temple. His interest in numismatics was already blossoming while at Oxford, where he was a founder member of the University's Numismatic Society. Mark's primary numismatic interests were devoted to Anglo-Saxon coins and, from there,
branched, to medieval European coinages in general. He benefitted from association with great scholars in the field such as Christopher Blunt and Michael Metcalf.

Mark's 'moment of reckoning' came in 1982 when Philip Grierson, the eminent numismatist at Cambridge was looking for a Research Assistant to publish his exhaustive collection of medieval European coins as well as that of the Fitzwilliam Museum. Although the post did not offer any permanent prospect and while Mark worked with the merchant bankers Kleinwort Benson, he took the decision to take up the post. This was a momentous decision not only of Mark's life or for the subject of medieval European numismatics, but also for the subject of numismatics in the UK in general. In nine years, Mark became the Keeper of the department in the Fitzwilliam - a post that  he held for twenty years, in which he
made several pioneering contributions to the subject from several angles.

Mark's interest in coins started as a collector and he remained
an avid collector at heart. Coins of many series appealed to him and
he had a unique sense of 'ownership' towards the collection of his museum. No series of coins was exempt from his enthusiasm and, in this way, he endeavoured to make the Cambridge collection the
perfect 'teaching' collection, constantly seeking to fill gaps, increasing scope and acquiring lesser-known rarities. Oriental coins was not his own forte - however, as a numismatist with unique
qualities (in the words of his obituarist in the 'Guardian' - "respect for attention to detail, a strong sense of purpose and efficiency, and a knack for perceiving the broader implications") he appreciated their importance very much. As the Keeper of the department, oriental coins were very much on his mind.

1 first met Mark during the International Numismatic Congress at Berlin in 1997, when he approached me with a proposal to be a "visiting curator', under a scheme for rearranging and publishing the coins from the Indian subcontinent that he had set up with funding from the Charles Wallace India Trust. The project had room for
inviting three such visiting scholars and, accordingly, the three following years saw Sanjay Garg, me and 5. Ejaz Hussain working in Cambridge in succession. I spent the spring and summer of 1999 in Cambridge working on the coins of the Indian princely states and
the colonial series. The first of the project's results - Sanjay and

Nurussabah Garg's catalogue of the Mughal and contemporary coinages in the Fitzwilliam is now in its 'manuscript' stage. Mark followed the project diligently and only days before his death, had
secured a publications grant to see it through its final publication.

While in Cambridge and in successive years of my career at the British Museum and Ashmolean Museum, I came to know Mark
better, both as a numismatic scholar and a person. He paid meticulous attention to detail and was a very efficient, even strict, manager. At the same time, he was congenial and warm, full of knowledge and had taste for an 'adventure' - like eating chillies from Indian snacks! The department became a hub of activities during his tenure as the Keeper - he helped set  up a superb web-
based interface for the collection, encouraged the building of a massive library of auction catalogues, and increased the outreach of
the department within collector communities like the metal detectorists.

The way he appreciated the importance of other coin series,
apart from having a keen research interest in his own areas of interest, was indeed praiseworthy. Alongside the project to publish
the Indian coins, Mark also drew on the expertise of Vlastimil Novak to catalogue the Islamic collections and actively increased the department's holdings of Chinese and other far-eastern coins. His enthusiasm for acquisitions as purchases, benefaction or
bequests was admirable - he very much relished it as if he were collecting the coins for himself! It was the same enthusiasm that
directed him to acquire the collection of Michael Broome, the founder of the ONS.

Mark held several honours both in the University as well as in numismatic circles. He was a Reader in numismatics and monetary history and taught in the university's department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic studies. He was made a fellow of Gonville and Caius College in 2005. He served as president of the British Numismatic Society (2004-08) and was awarded the prestigious Medal of the Royal Numismatic Society in 2008.

## Mark is survived by his wife, Fiona and children Molly, Hal and Will. Shailendra Bhandare --- Shams Eshraq

It is with great sadness that I report the demis Abdolrazagh Shams Eshraq (27.6.1937 - 3.10.2 us, simply and fondly, called "Shams".  Shams in Isfahan where he started his coin collecting h years ago and became, deservedly, one numismatists worldwide. In Iran, Shams was figure, not only in Isfahan, but also in the mark whenever he visited, many would welcome him and shower him with coin questions that he g His two well-remembered publications, "A St Coinage Of The Islam Empire", published in recent "Silver Coinage Of The Caliphs", publi which he was awarded a prize (see JONS 204 contributions to Islamic numismatics. Apart fro hobbies, Shams was a respected journalist w gardening and travelling, always lending a help in need. Shams will be missed inside and outsid heartfelt condolences to his wife, his son, Beh Sepideh.

**ONS Meeting Utrecht 2011** Some 35 members attended the annual ONS Geldmuseum, Utrecht on 15 October. *Great Expectations......*

*Concentrating hard...... * Four talks were given as follows:

Paul Stevens: "The 'Lucknow' rupee: where talk described some series of rupees in the nam with mintname Muhammadabad Banaras, whic Nawabs of Awadh and the East India Compan se of my dear friend 2011), whom most of s was born and lived hobby more than fifty of the well-known a very well-known kets of Tehran where, m, flock around him generously answered. tudy Of The Earliest

1990, and the more ished 2010,  and for 4. are very important m his coin collecting who enjoyed reading ping hand to anyone de Iran by many. Our hnam, and daughter, Yahya Jaffar S meeting in at the
was it struck?" This me of Shah 'Alam II, ch were struck by the ny. These coins were
struck at Benares, Lucknow and certain which types were struck coins bears regnal years but no A was these coins that may have be *Paul, wondering which of the*

Shailendra Bhandare: "Some in of the former Ethnological Mu collection of Oriental coins in process of being incorporate Geldmuseum. A selection of so several Zodiac mohurs, as we occasion displayed in the entran speaker had selected a number periods and provided some detail *Shailendra making a fine* *A zodiac mohur from the former* *Virgo, Agra mint,* *AH*

Ellen Raven: "Gupta coins f Ethnological Museum, Rotterdam system for categorising Gupta go rather than the typological system In doing so, she used examples Rotterdam collection. d Allahabad but it is not known for
at which mint. One series of these AH date and it was suggested that it een struck at Allahabad. *e coins were struck at Allahabad*
nteresting coins from the collection useum, Rotterdam". The extensive
the Rotterdam museum is in the ed into the collection of the ome rare Mughal coins, including ell as Gupta coins, were for this nce hall of the Geldmuseum.  The
of coins from different series and led information about them. *point about a zodiac mohur* *r Ethnological Museum collection;* *H* *1033, regnal year 19* from the collection of the former
m". The speaker described her new old coins based on stylistic criteria, ms that had traditionally been used. of Gupta coinage from the former
*Ellen about to explain her new system for categ*

*A gold dinara of Purugupta from the former Et*

*collection * Jan Lucassen & Jaco Zuijderduijn: "Th numismatic supremacy? Global perspectives on speakers introduced the audience to some ne global history undertaken by groups of scholar They also singled out possibilities for numisma make contributions to these research fields, an gap between Oriental numismatics and global the speakers stated that all too often western nu discuss numismatics from a western point of vi the vast coinages and economies of Asia over By way of example, they described the issue copper coinage for a certain area of northern Ind

*Jaco pondering the possible end of Western num* *gorising Gupta coins* * * *thnological Museum* he end of Western n numismatics". The
w research fields in s in the Netherlands. atists of the Orient to nd thus to bridge the history. In their talk umismatists tended to ew, thereby ignoring
the past 2000 years. e and circulation of dian. *mismatic supremacy..* *...ably supp*

After the talks, the usual auctio which raised about 700 euros for over, some 22 of the attendees Chinese restaurant.

Jan Lingen is to be congratu meeting and auction so success English. On this occasion, while the Netherlands, there were also and four members from the UK Geldmuseum for hosting the me Woerds, the museum librarian, providing most of the above phot

The next meeting will take p All members are welcome to atte *** *** **New York Meeting** The North American branch of will meet again in 2012 at the ve Numismatic Convention. The pro Judith Kolbas: "Mamluk glass Roman Kovalev: "On the comp Noonan's complete dirham ho Michael L. Bates: "Remarks on coinage labeled '# bi-dirham Aleksandr I. Naymark: "The in in Central Asian coinage: the

The organisers will also try t announcements of interest to O Michael Bates in advance.

The meeting will take place 5:00 to 6:30 in the Beekman Hotel, 301 Park Avenue, New necessary to register for NYINC east elevators).

There will be a dinner togeth ONS meeting. Please inform Mic Tiesenhausen@yahoo.com, if yo *** ***

## New Members *UK Region* *ported by Jan*
on of coins and books took place, r ONS funds. Once the meeting was s enjoyed a nice meal at a nearby
ulated yet again for organising the sfully. All the talks were given in e most of those present were from
some from neighbouring countries - We should also like to thank the eeting, and, in particular to Ans ter
for facilitating the event and for tographs. place on Saturday, 20 October 2012. end.
f the Oriental Numismatic Society enue of the New York International ogram will include four papers: weights" pilation and completion of oard catalogue" n the eastern caliphal copper '"
nternational silver and local copper e case of Sogdiana"
to include very brief notices and ONS members. If possible, contact
on Saturday, 7 January 2012, from Suite, 18 th floor, Waldorf-Astoria

York. All are welcome. It is not to attend the ONS meeting (use the her at a nearby restaurant after the chael Bates, u intend to come to the dinner., --- *European Region* ** ** **Lists Received**

**1.** ** ** ** ** UK; orders@earlyworldcoins.com) list 51, of oriental coins.

## New and Recent Publications

***A Survey of the Coinage of the Seljuqs of R*** ū ***m*** by Michael Broome, edited and prepared for publication by Vlastimil Novák. Royal Numismatic Society Special Publication No. 48, London, 2011, Pp. xvi + 400, and 62 plates. ISSN 0080 4487, ISBN 090140554X.

"This volume represents the life's work of Michael Broome, author of the *Handbook of Islamic Coins*, and founder of the ONS, who died in 1997. It has been edited and prepared for publication by Vlastimil Novák, head of oriental coins at the National MuseumNáprstek Museum in Prague. Some 1119 varieties (most of them illustrated) of Seljuq coins in silver, bronze and gold are listed with more than 7,500 specimens noted, and there are historical introductions to each reign, together with extensive discussions of mint attributions, weight standards, epigraphy, iconography and style. The survey covers the general Seljuq coinage (12 th to early 14 th century AD ), plus vassal coinages (joint coinages with Cilician Armenians and Artuqids of Mardin). The volume also includes a biographical account of the author by his daughter. * * ***Sylloge of Islamic Coins in the Israel Museum: The Paul Balog*** * * ***Collection*** **-** ***Egypt*** vol. III - ***The Mamlûks*** ** ** ***1248-1517***, by Issa M. Baidoun with a Contribution by Warren C. Schultz. General Editors: Stefan B. Heidernann and Haim Gitler. Published by the Israel Museum, Jerusalem, in association  with EUT Edizioni Universita di Trieste & Numismatica Bernardi S.R.L., Trieste, 2011. Price: € 60 plus shipping from Numismatica Bernardi, Trieste.

"The present volume is the first in a series devoted to the Islamic coins in the collection of The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. The majority of these coins were donated to the museum by the late Paul Balog. The Israel Museum is proud to continue Balog's legacy by making his rich coin collection available to the public. The adoption of the sylloge format, organized by individual mints, is best suited to the needs of scholars of political and monetary history. The Egyptian series is by far the strongest in Balog's collection, and one of the largest of its kind. Appropriately, the Mamlûk mints of Egypt were chosen to be the subject of the first volume of the series."

Issa M. Baidoun is an Islamic art historian and numismatist, affiliated to the numismatic department at the Israel Museum. He is also a fellow of the Israel Numismatic Society. Haim Gitler is Curator of Numismatics at the Israel Museum. He is currently the president of the Israel Numismatic Society and a lecturer at Tel Aviv university. Stefan B. Heidemann is Associate Curator in the Department of Islamic Art at The Metropolitan Museum, as well as Professor of Islamic History and Artistic and Material Culture at The Bard Graduate Center, New York. Warren C. Schultz is Professor of History at DePaul University, Chicago. He is also a fellow of the American Numismatic Society * * ***Hıstory of Ottoman Coıns*** *-* Volume 4, by Dr Atom Damalı; in Turkish and English, pp. 360, in colour, hard cover, 210 x 297 cm, published by Nilüfer Damalı Education, Culture and Environment Foundation. * * This volume covers in detail the coins of Sultan Mehmed III and Sultan Ahmed I. "Under the influence of the military, economic and social structure, the Ottoman money system naturally moved towards a new process by the end of the 16 th century. This process lasted approximately one hundred years during the 1600s and struck a heavy blow to the Ottoman financial structure. The Ottoman mines, which were unable to compete with the cheap silver ore that Europe obtained from America, began to shut down one after another. This was followed by the shutdown of mints. Thus, the coins of Mehmed III and Ahmed I, the early sultans of this period, were struck under these difficult conditions. The volume includes the pictures of 270 silver and gold coins of Sultan Mehmed III and 200 coins of Sultan Ahmed I. In addition, it details the regional history relating to the 40 cities that struck Ottoman coins during this period, and describes the characteristics of the coins struck in those cities. The last section of the book comprises a coin inventory relating to the two sultans." ***The Alexander Medallion: Exploring the origins of a unique*** ***artefact***, by Holt, F & Bopearachchi, O (eds), Imago Lattara 2011. ISB 978-2-95166-796-9 The unique artefact of the title is a gold medallion, featuring, on one side, the head of Alexander wearing an elephant scalp, and, on the other, the image of an elephant. It was first published by Bopearachchi and Flandrin in 2005. They suggested then, as they believe now, that this medallion was made following the battle of the Hydaspes, when Alexander defeated the Indian forces of Porus. Since its publication the object has been condemned as a modern forgery, or the attribution proposed by Bopearachchi has been otherwise contested by a number of well-informed scholars. This volume, based upon a seminar in 2007 has contributions from seven proponents of the authenticity of the medal. None of the critics are represented, however, though an effort was apparently made to involve them in the seminar (p.67). A detailed and critical review of this book is due to be published in the next edition of the Numismatic Chronicle. \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

*De Muntmeester, * September 2011, the journal of the numismatic study circle of Diest, Belgium, includes an article on a 33 mm bronze medal, probably made in Goa and which imitates a medal of Catherine the Great of Russia. The article is in Flemish. For more information, please contact Patrick Pasmans, diest44@hotmail.com **Auction News**

Steve Album Rare Coins (PO Box 7386, Santa Rosa, CA 95407, USA; <https://www.stevealbum.com)> held its auction 11 on 16-17 September. The auction comprised some 1500 lots of oriental coins, including a superb collection of Chittagong coins from the period of the Arakanese occupation, and a fine run of Sikh rupees.
Following their remarkably successful sale earl and Eden have announced that they wlill hold Important Coins of the Islamic World on 23 already consigned for this sale include an Ara Caliph drachm of Dimashq 75h and a unique U at the 'Mine of the Commander of the Faithful' earliest date recorded for this rare and his enquiries please contact Stephen Lloyd or Tom 5344, info@mortonandeden.com). *Arab-Sasanian Standing Caliph drachm,*

*Umayyad dinar 89h struck at the 'Mine of the * *Faithful'* **Other News**

**Third Seminar on Early Iranian and Central** **Numismatics in Memoriam Boris Kochnev (1**

The seminar was held at Hofstra University, He April 2011. The subject was the coinage of t Caucasus to Xinjiang and from ancient times Ages. The seminar was sponsored by the Mid Asian Program at Hofstra University and was o Professors, Aleksandr Naymark and Daniel Va with Curator Emeritus of ANS, Dr Michael B papers by 10 authors and over 20 registered list New York members of ONS and ANS in graduate students from Bryn Mawr College, Columbia, NYU, Connecticut State, and Yal seminar was followed by a lively dinner at southern Brooklyn. Below we publish submitted edited by Dr Michael Bates. See also the photo ***An obscure period in the history of Tabaristan*** ***of written and numismatic sources*** *** *** *By* ** ** *Konstantin Kravtsov (Hermitage Museum, S* * * The Caspian province of Iran, Tabaristan, wa the Greek historian, Diodorus Siculus (90-30 conquests in Europe and Asia of the mythical B who either lived in the days of Abraham or, acc a contemporary of the Trojan War (13 th o ( *Historical Library*. II, 2, 3). From then, un Abbasid governor, 'Umar b. al-'Ala, the hist very sparsely and ambiguously recorded. There this: on the one hand, the peripheral geogr Tabaristan, and on the other, ** ** the fact that all inf Tabaristan chronicles about the early period of lier this year, Morton d a further auction of

April 2012. Rarities ab-Sasanian Standing Umayyad dinar struck ' in the year 89h, the storic issue. For all Eden (+44 020 7493 *Dimashq 75h* * * *Commander of the* **l Asian** **1940-2002)**
empstead, N.Y., on 4 the regions from the s to the late Middle
dle East and Central organised by Hofstra arisco, in cooperation Bates. There were 11 teners, which besides ncluded faculty and UPENN, Princeton, le Universities. The Café Uzbekistan, in d abstracts of papers, on p. 35 below. ***(760s*** ***AD*** ***): Analysis*** *St. Petersburg)*
s first mentioned by 0 bc) as one of the Babylonian king, Nin,
cording to Plato, was or 12 th century BC ) ntil the reign of the ory of Tabaristan is e are two reasons for raphical position of formation in the local f its history is based
on the legendary tradition. The with legendary and mythological many periods in the history of Ta

One of these obscure and in death of the last Tabaristan Spah reign of the Abbasid governor paper, by analysing the written resolve the chronology of rule Tabaristan. The most interestin connected to the reign of Kh previous Abbasid governor, Raw tyranny and injustice towards the circumstances the appointment random choice. He was of Irania Barmakid family of court favou attitude to the Iranians, Khalid candidate to end the revolts in tyranny, and to consolidate Ab According to local chronicles, K years (Ibn Isfandiyar, 1941. P. 18 1850. S. 274, 325. Khwandamir, evidence indicates that he rule governor struck drachms in his n

PYE / AH 155. On the other han issues dated 114 (fig. 1) and 11 likely that Khalid b. Barmak, bei first to strike coins for some tim with the name of the last Spahbe on the one hand, an attempt to leg hand, demonstrated his conciliat Tabaristan, in contrast to Rawh actions. When Khalid b. Barmak he began to issue drachms in h Pahlavi script only.

The basic conclusions of the chronological scheme: Governor **Abu-l-Khasib** 109-10 PYE, AH 143-44

# K

**Khazim b. Khuzayma** 110-11 PYE, ah 144-45

# K

**Abu'l-** ʿ **Abbas al-Tusi** 111-12 PYE, AH 145-46

# K **Rawh b. Hatim** AH 146-48 **Khalid b. Barmak** 114-20 PYE, AH 148-55

# K

*F* *Khurshid, 114* *PYE* *The State Hermitage* *1.71 g.,*
interlacing of real historical facts l subjects complicates and obscures abaristan.
tricate periods is the time from the hbed, Khurshid, until the end of the r, Khalid b. Barmak. The present n and numismatic sources, tries to
of the first Abbasid governors in g conclusions of this research are alid b. Barmak. He replaced the wh b. Hatim, who was convicted of e inhabitants of Tabaristan. ** ** In such
of Khalid b. Barmak was not a an origin and the head of the famous urites. Because of his sympathetic

- Barmak was the most suitable  Tabaristan after Rawh b. Hatim's bbasid control over this province. Khalid b. Barmak governed for four

81, 187; 1905. P. 124. Zahir al-Din,, 1954. P. 406), but the numismatic ed longer. On the one hand, the name from 115 PYE / AH 149 to 120
d, a series of Khurshid posthumous 15 PYE (fig. 2) is known. It is very
ing a wise administrator, decided at me in the traditional "frozen" style
ed, Khurshid. This action reflected, gitimise his power and, on the other tory policy towards the populace of h b. Hatim's tyrannical and unjust k further consolidated his authority, his own name, but with legends in e paper are shown in the following Coinage **Khurshid posthumous issues**

# 110 PYE, AH 144 **Khurshid posthumous issues**

# 110-11 PYE, AH 144-45 **Khurshid posthumous issues**

# 111 PYE, AH 145 (and 112 PYE, AH 146?)

**In the name of Rawh** **b. Hatim** AH 146-48 **Khurshid posthumous issues**

114-15 PYE, AH 148-49 **In the name of Khalid** **b. Barmak** 115-20 PYE, AH 149-55 * * * * *Fig.1*

# E ( AH 148, AD 765-66) *e Museum, ON-V-M-44* * 23.5 mm*. ** **
* * *Fig. 2* *Khurshid, 115* *PYE* *(* *AH* *148,* *AD* *76* *The State Hermitage Museum* *ON-V-M-Azmuz-10600* *1.95 g., 25 mm*

***Crisis on an Asian Frontier: The Counterm*** ***Dirhams in Khurasan in the Early Eighth Cen*** *By Stuart Sears (Wheaton College, Massachuse* This is being published as a separate article else ** ** ***The Very Last Sogdian Coin***

*By Luke Treadwell (Oxford University), A* *(Hofstra University)* **  ** ** ** *Fig. 1. Arab-Sogdian coin of* *AH* *(Photo courtesy owner; Zeno.r*

*Fig. 2: Brick from Afrasiab with inscrip* *(photo credit Yuri Karev, published with kind p*

*Grenet * ** ** The transition from traditional coins based o Sogdian models to the new Islamic coins starte of the 8 th century AH and continued, so it seems This process is still only partially docume interesting discoveries are constantly being changing the overall picture quite significantly. piece of data is an Arab-Sogdian copper coin, Samarqand some 10 years ago and was posted site Zeno.ru ( № 8). One side of this specimen while the legend of the other one is in Arabic (fi

The inscription on the margin of the Ara *all* ā *h* ḍ *uriba h* ā *dh* ā *'l- fals bi-* ī *shtih* ā *\[n\] f* ī *sanat* occupies the field: *sitt* ī *n wa mi'a*. There are mistakes: the numeral *sitt* ī *n* is written without t the long vowel ī; likewise, the second *y* ā *'* whi in the word Ishtihan and can be seen in an a *66-67)* *m,* ***marking of Umayyad***

***ntury*** ***AD*** *** *** *etts)* ewhere. *Aleksandr Naymark* *H* *160* *ru 8)* ** ** *ption* 'Ishtihn' *permission of Frantz* on a variety of old ed only in the middle, for several decades. ented and new and made, which keep. One promising new
which was found in d by its owner on the n is entirely Sogdian,
ig. 1). abic side reads *bism* *t*, while the date itself e some orthographic the *y* ā *'* that indicates ch is usually present almost contemporary
inscription on bricks from Afras The last tall vertical shaft of th letter *alif,* although in Arabic a without one. Alternatively, this f shaft of *n* ū *n* similar to the one o (fig. 2). Whatever was the case, simply did not fit in: the die sink in the field; then he moved to th phrase *f* ī *sanat* and continued fu name; he, however, miscalculate final letter. The other side has a Y-shape by a Sogdian legend of three wo to the poor state of the coin. An may be recognised in the first w following letters are consistent w the title *xw* β *w*, but this is by no which is the best preserved, remaining part - *...x/* γ *'nk* (?), t interpretation. It is, however, tem from a place name ending in x'n of the third word are very likely t preceding them are complet identification of this word as name).

Some conclusions about the from the year of its issue: AH 16 of al-Muqanna's revolt in Centr the Zarafshan valley above the B the valley of Kashka-darya, and Abbasid governor, Jibr ā ' ī l b. Y leaving the city in the hands o (Bol'shakov 1976, 95). Yet our coinage of the rebels: the single of al-Muqanna' (Kochnev 1995 Kochnev 2001b) is very differ important, in the content of it legend of this Arab-Sogdian co issue data, while the inscriptions the issue data and consist s statements.

We can form a judgment a issuing our coin even without k inscription: in accordance with lo coin provides a visual referenc *tamgha* placed in the central fiel could lead us back to the period even possibly to the first cent Ilyasov 2004; Cazzoli and Cereti 2007, 142-4), by the second ha undoubtedly acquired a very pa firmly associated with a claim Samarqand (Naymark 2005). M and his Abbasid opponents, neit for the minting of this coin, on power over Samarqand in AH resided in Ishtihan. In AH 160 Yaz ī d b. Gh ū rak.

From the story of Bukharkhu *Bukhara* (Narshakhi-Ridhawi 19 11. we know that the revolt of  aspirations of the Sogdian rule independence. Yet, judging by Gh ū rak, had no intention to join to join the latter against the reb Gh ū rak issued this coin in order rights over Samarqand at the m Raiments" managed to push the A capital for the first time in half a remain an isolated instance: with defeats suffered by the followers 780, the rebellion was crushed (B
iyab (fig. 2) is omitted on the coin. he same word can be taken for the and Persian texts ī *sht* ī *hn* is written final letter could be the tall vertical on the brick stamp from Afrasiyab
it is likely that the loop of the *n* ū *n* ker started by carving the numerals he margin, where he began with the urther around to the end of the city ed the space and had to sacrifice the
ed *tamgha* in the centre surrounded ords, none of which is complete due
initial *x* and possibly a following *w* word, while weak traces of the two
with β *w*, so that the word could be o means certain. The second word,
lacks the first two letters. The though sufficiently visible, defies mpting to see in it a "nisba" formed

(Ishtikhan -?). ** ** The last four letters to be *m''n*, but the first letter or two tely obliterated, preventing the well (which is possibly a proper
e origin of this coin can be drawn 60 ( AD 776-777) witnessed the peak
ral Asia. The rebels seized most of Bukharan oasis, gained control over
d were active in Tokharistan. The Ya ḥ y ā, had to evacuate Samarqand, of "the people in White Raiments" r specimen does not represent the
known *fals* type issued in the name 5, 32-33; Kochnev 2001a, 16-17; rent in design, and, what is more
s inscriptions. Indeed, the Arabic oin contains nothing more than the
s on the coins of al-Muqanna' lack solely of religious and political
about the authority responsible for knowing the content of the Sogdian
ocal tradition, the Sogdian side of a ce to the minting location - the ld. While the history of this *tamgha*
of Hunnic domination in Sogd and turies AD (Ilyasov 2003, 135-141;
i 2005, fig. 11; Ilyasov 2007; А lram alf of the 8 th century this sign had articular meaning in Sogd - it was m to authority over the realm of Meanwhile, aside from al-Muqanna'
ther of whom could be responsible nly one person could have claimed 160 - the Ikhshid of Sogd, who this title most likely belonged to
uda Buniyat related in the *Tarikh-i* 939, 15; Narshakhi-Frye 1954, 10f al-Muqanna' revived the political
rs who still hoped to regain their y our coin, the Ikhshid, Yaz ī d b. n the struggle against the Arabs, nor bels. It is most likely that Yaz ī d b.
r to remind the Sogdians about his moment when the "people in White Arabs out of the Ikhshid's ancestral
century. This issue was destined to hin a year the tide was turned by the
s of al-Muqanna' and, no later than Bol'shakov 1976, 96-97).
***Islamic Coins from a Hindu Temple: Re-ev*** ***Policy towards Hindu Sacred Sites through*** ***Evidence from the Kashmir Smast in Gandhar*** *By Waleed Ziad (Yale University)*

This paper examines a recent find of coin legends, that were minted and circulated within a Saivite Hindu cave temple in the Hindu Gandhara. The majority of these specimens can Ghaznavid period, based on legends and t numismatic evidence, considered against con calls into question certain historical narrative invasion of al-Hind, which posit that the Gh uniformly iconoclastic policy towards sites.".

The Kashmir Smast cave temple and its e local mint, issuing its own civic copper currency the Kidarite to the Hindu Shahi period and currency, while variable in fabric, generally c copper units ranging from 0.5 - 1 g, which temple offerings. The existence of such local Hindustan is attested in Awfi's *Jawami al-Hika* suggests that some mints would have functi under the ultimate authority and guarantee of th

Textual and archaeological evidence sugge eleventh century, Ghaznavid armies would ha Kashmir Smast region into their empire, in the p their domains from Gandhara to the northern (Swat). The image of Mahmud as *butshikan* advanced by contemporary historians, notably Bayhaqi, implies that the Kashmir Smast would same fate as the major temples attested in the therefore, surprising that the Kashmir Smast ha silver and copper issues, as well as new small c Arabic legends minted in the Kashmir Smast fab

The 24 coins featuring Arabic legends w examined from the cave temple can be separa Group I comprises published coins circulating a the Kabul Valley, produced by larger 'state' m two Habbarid *qanhari* *dirhams*, seven late dirhems of Ibrahim (of which two may be local Ghaznavid Æ 2 g civic issues (SNAT, Gha Hurasan IV, 474-477, but bearing different enigmatic clipped *dirham*.  Group II compri small Æ varieties minted in Kashmir Smas derived from earlier Hindu Shahi Kashmir Sma Shahi horseman type citing the Ghaznavid r 1030-1039). Group II also features a unique Æ (r. AD 997-1030).

There are several conclusions to be draw First, the temple and its mint continued fu Ghaznavids. The relative rarity of these spec they circulated alongside earlier Hindu Shahi the Kashmir Smast, which are amongst t specimens found in the area. Another pertinent the Arabic legends on Group II varieties are leg sufficiently original, implying that that some loc versed in Arabic.

This numismatic evidence raises questi Mahmud's policy towards religious sites in G been influenced, in certain cases, by larger economic considerations. A critical compariso evidence with early text sources offers a n explanations. The Kashmir Smast temple independent civic monetary system could have maintained under Ghaznavid rule for the temple trade entrepôt between Gandhara and Swat. could be rooted in the Ghaznavid dual policy to units versus raiding territories. The Kashmir Sm may have been treated as an integrated unit of autonomous tributary, as in the case of Tabaris presented in this paper suggest that further res ***valuating Ghaznavid*** ***h new Numismatic*** ***ra***
ns, featuring Arabic n the Kashmir Smast, u Kush in northern
n be attributed to the typology. This new ntemporary histories, s of the Ghaznawid haznawids pursued a s Hindu sacred
environs sustained a y for 700 years, from d beyond. The civic omprises small, thin may have served as
minting practices in *yat*, and his narrative ioned independently he sovereign. ests that, in the early ave incorporated the process of expanding kingdom of Udyana (destroyer of idols),

'Utbi, Gardezi, and d have undergone the e early sources. It is, as yielded Ghaznavid
copper varieties with bric. which the author had ated into two groups. across Hindustan and mints.  This includes

Ghaznavid *qanhari* imitations), four late azna / Kabul XIVd
legends), and one ises 10 unpublished st fabric. Three are ast issues, including a ruler, Mas'ud (r. AD Æ unit citing Mahmud wn from these finds. nctioning under the cimens suggests that civic derivates from the most prevalent point is that most of gible, and designs are cal mintmasters were ions as to whether Gandhara could have r administrative and on of the numismatic number of potential

| complex and its | e, for example, been | e's potential role as a |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Another explanation | wards administrative | mast and its environs |
| the empire, or as an | stan. The hypotheses | search is required on |

Another explanation wards administrative mast and its environs
the empire, or as an stan. The hypotheses search is required on

Ghaznavid policy towards no institutions at large. ** ** *Fig. 1* * * Fig 1: Kashmir Smast early Gh

Obv.: *l* ā *ilaha ill* ā *; all* ā *h wah(dah* Rev: *ma* ḥ *m* ū *d* or *mu* ḥ *ammad* wit

Fig. 2: Kashmir Smast early of bull and horseman Hindu Shah Obv.: K ū fic Arabic: *(l* ā *) ilaha ill* *lahu; (ma)s'* ū *d*. Rev.: Horseman facing left.   0.9

Fig 3: Kashmir Smast Gha 'crescent and circle' Hindu Shah * * Obv.: Kufic *all* ā *h* in circle. Rev.: Circle within crescent. 0.95 g/ 15 mm

*** *** ***Rasulid Coinage in the Da*** ***A Preliminary Textual Study*** *By Daniel Varisco (Hofstra Univ*

The Rasulid dynasty of the 1 received only limited attention by textual material, as well as ava important texts for reconstruc thirteenth century Yemen is a *d* the second Rasulid sultan, al-Ma from 647/1249 to 694/1295.  T volumes in 2003 and 2005 by 'Abd al-Rahim Jazm, as *Nur al-m* Français d'Archéologie et de Sc focused on a passage from this t used in Mecca at the end of the t on the Kamili and Qaysaniya dir the Mecca weights for 100 Kam Egyptian weights, so that in Me of 93 dirhams.  Information is p Kamili dirhams in the Rasulid c of these towns also minted M Mu ẓ affari dirhams are said to cir the Egyptian Kamili are preferred cities and regions, like Syria conducting their selling and bu Mu ẓ affari dirham is limited in c Ali, al-Sirayn and Mecca. Ment Qaysaniya dirhams, which circu These are exchanged for the Ka Qa'da and Dhu al-Hijja, when minted each year.  The text furthe exchange rates for these dirham draw attention to this source coinage during the zenith of the R ** ** *** *** *** *** *** *** on-Muslim subjects and religious *Fig. 2* *Fig. 3* ** ** haznavid Æ fractional (enlarged)

*hu); l* ā *sha(r* ī *k lahu)* hin leaf   0.87g / 15 mm

Ghaznavid AE fractional derivative hi jitals citing Mas'ud (enlarged) ā *; all* ā *h wah dahu; (la) shar* ī *ka*

6 g / 14 mm * * aznavid Æ fractional derivative of i units (enlarged 2)

***aftar of al-Malik al-Mu*** ẓ ***affar:*** *versity)* 13 th -15 th centuries in Yemen has
y historians, but there is a wealth of ailable coinage.  One of the most cting the economic life of late *daftar* of field reports compiled for alik al-Mu ẓ affar Y ū suf, who reigned This unique text was edited in two
the Yemeni historian, Muhammad *ma'arif* and published by the Centre ciences Sociales de Sanaa.  My talk
text regarding the kinds of dirhams thirteenth century.  Entitled "Report rhams in Mecca," the text notes that
mili dirhams are 7% less than the ecca one would only have the value provided on exchange rates for the
ities of al-Mahjam and Zabid; both Mu ẓ affari dirhams.  The Rasulid rculate only a little in Mecca, where

| d. | The same is true for other major |
|:--- |:--- |
|, Baghdad, India, Ethiopia, etc., |  |
| uying only with the Kamili. | The | tion is also made in the text of the
ulate in Mecca and nowhere else. amili during the months of Dhu aln the Qaysaniya dinars are newly
er describes the seasonal changes in ms.  The purpose of the talk was to
for relevant local information on Rasulid era.
***Coin Finds from the Heart of the Mongol Emp*** ***Results of the Bonn University Excavations 20***

*By Stefan Heidemann (The Metropolitan Museu* *Bard Graduate Center)*

The Mongol empire stretched from the bor Europe (Silesia) to Korea in the east. Qara Q capital and seat of the Qagan, the Great Kh Between 2000 and 2005 Bonn University, un Prof. H. R. Roth, and the Academy of Sci Ulambayar Erdenebat, excavated in the market a

The first five seasons (2000-2004) retrieve coin finds constitute an independent source political and economic history of Qara Qorum circulation in Mongolia was almost unkno excavation report from Qara Qorum by the R Evtyuchova from the sixties of the past century.

The most important discovery from a hist was the first dated document to mention the dated 635 ( AD 1237-8), (see ONS Newsletter 1 on a coin came about two years after the supp the palace of Ögedai in 1235, which proba beginning of the urban settlement. Among almost all, except for nine Islamic coins, wer coins, suggesting that daily purchases were alm with Chinese coins. We already knew from c production in China dropped considerably wit fact is mirrored in the coin finds from the Mong Chinese-type coins from the Mongol Yuan per Yuan coins were apparently still available in la circulation apparently did not have to be consid by new coins. The Bei Song period ( AD 976-1 with all the emperors, and almost all the reignin comprising 258 coins. Coins of the Jin Dynas Chinggis Khan empire bordering the Song em would expect, comparatively abundant with 19 ** ** Dynastic distribution of coin finds: Xi Han (25-221) Tang (618-907) Nan Tang (937-975) Bei Song (976-1126) Nan Song (1127-1275) Jin (1149-1190) Unidentified Tang to Song Yuan (1260-1312) Mongol 'Islamic' silver

Almost all coins in the newly founded capital China. From the point of view of coin circulati specific, the market of the Chinese quarter northern Chinese city. Qorum was apparently f the northern currency zone of China.

The most spectacular discoveries of the exc minted in *Qara Qorum* or just *Qorum*. The find as a mint for the first time. Seven of the nine were minted there. One of the coin types, that w is already published (S. Heidemann *et al*., "Th Evidence for Qara Qorum from the Year 635 *für Archäologie außereuropäischer Kulturen* Previously, coins of Qorum were unknowingly a hoard. Their findspot, however, the Oasis of reading *Qrim* instead of * Qorum*, although there from the Crimean peninsula and the letter ' *ya* missing (K. M. Baipakov and V. N. Nastich. veshchei i monet XIII v. iz Otrara" in *Ka* *feodalizma (problemy etnopoliticheskoi istorii)*, 60). The full documentation of the Islamic coin final report. ***pire: Qara Qorum*** ***000-04*** *um of Art and The* rderlands of middle Qorum was the early han of the Mongols. nder the direction of ience in Ulan-Bator area of the city. ed 332 coins. These
about the regional, - Medieval money  own, except for an Russian numismatist. torical point of view
city of Qara Qorum 185 2005). This date posed construction of ably constituted the
the 332 coin finds, re Chinese-type cast most exclusively made collections that coin
h Mongol rule. This gol capital. Only five riod were found. Pre- arge quantities. Their derably supplemented 1126), is represented ng periods and issues,
ty, the northern prempire, were, as one coins.
were imported from ion, Qorum, or to be r, appeared to be a firmly integrated into cavations were coins ds established Qorum

Islamic silver coins with the date AH 635, he First Documentary 5/1237-8," *Zeitschrift* 1 \[2006\], 93-102). y published as part of Utrar, had led to the e are no similar coins *'* of  *Qr* ī *m* would be

"Klad serebrianykh *azakhstan v epokhu *, Alma-ata, 1981, 20ns will be part of the *Coin of Qorum (on first line of*

*2004-351* ** ** ***Coins of the Ilkhanid Ruler Abu*** *By Necla Akkaya (Selcuk Univers*

The subject of this presentation which were minted by Abu S sultan, on the evidence of the e museums. It is possible that alm period can be found in these two

The ninth Sultan of the Ilkh Khan, ruled AD 1316-1336. Duri won many victories, but died (Yuvalı 2000, 104-105). He wa Khudabanda, and his reign saw Iran (Öztuna 2005, 557). The common in Anatolia, exhibiting a

The coins of this period can according to the geometric for surround the inscriptions. The di types 1, while the eighth type in 1970, 763-813). *Type 1: Curvilinear oc* *Type 2: Mihrab* ***.*** *Baghdad,*

# AH 7 *Type 3: Curvilinear Pentagon,* *Tabriz,*

1 Editor's note: this listing excludes t struck only at Pol- i Aras, Erzurum, exclude Album type A.

*obverse), period of Ögedei (Kar2-* *9)(enlarged)* ***u Sa'id Bahadur Khan*** *sity, Konya) *
n was the evaluation of the coins Sa'id Bahadur Khan, the Ilkhanid examples in the Konya and Mardin most all coin types of the Ilkhanid
museums. hanid Empire, Abu Sa'id Bahadur ing his twenty-year reign, the sultan
without designating a successor as the son of Uljaytu Muhammad the peak of Ilkhanid sovereignty in
coins of this period are the most a number of different types.
be classified into eight main types, rms ("cartouche" or "frame") that
irhams are divided into seven main ncludes all the copper coins (Artuk *ctagram* ***,*** *Erzinjan,* *AH* *717*

*Mardin, Sebzevar and Tabriz,  * *719-23* ** **

*** *** *Baghdad, Mardin, Sabzavar and* *AH* *722-24* the rare "triangle" type (Album type E), Lahijan and Kayseri. It also seems to
*  * * * *Type 4* ***:*** *Square and Circle, Baghdad, Sivas, Su*

# AH 723-29 *Type 5: Circle and looped octagon, K*

*Type 6: Octalobe and looped octagon, Ahlat,* *Damghan, Harput, Hilla,* İ *sfahan, Mardin, Mos*

*Sabzavar, Sinjar, Sivrihisar, Shabankara, She* *Tus,* *AH* *724-33* *** ***

*Type 7: Square Kufic Shahada,* *** *** *Ruler's name*

*Baghdad, Basra, Bayburt, Barda', Abu-Isha* *Erzurum, Kashan, Kayseriye, Kirman, Kır* ş *eh* *Maragha, Rayy, Ruyan, Saveh, Sinjar, Sivas,* *Tavus, Tabriz and Yazd,* *AH* *7* ** **

***T*** *Type 8: Copper coin, various mints a* ** ** ** ** ** ** *ultaniye and Tabriz,* *Kayseri, 727* *Baghdad, Jajerm,* *sul, Nishapur, Saveh,* *hristan, Tabriz and* *e in Uighur script.* *aq, Abu-Sa'idiya,* *ir, Konya, Ma'den,* *Sultaniya, Shustar,* *and types*

**A Copy of the Royal Seal of Bu** **the Archaeological Site of Afra** **of One Interesting Disappointm**

*By Olga Kirillova (Orel, Russ* *University)*

A few years ago one of the auth poor and blurry computer scan "bracteate" with crudely exec blundered inscription in old Slav "columns" of the original tex explaining that the object had be of Afrasiyab, the site of ancient S yellowish. base metal with trace well into a category of objects th - as of today archaeological sit reproductions of different ty Theodosius II to Heraclius, bo single-sided bracteates with inscriptions. Also known are pie images derived from coins and datable to early Islamic times. *Fig. 1. "Bractea*

*Fig. 2. Gold se* The principal feature that makes the image and distorted inscript the state seal of the Bulgarian Ts "irregularity" of the date seem explanation - while during the S so-called Silk Road trade gradua Eurasian trade was revived dur beginning of which corresponds As this tsar was very active in possible that documents with t Samarqand on the way to Qar European embassies travelled du known that Christianity experie during the first decades of Mong that some local Christian mad jewelry, employing images from embassy. All our persuasive theorie speculations: when finally the s arrived, it immediately became piece struck by a die worked wit as they were, the authors, howe about the nature of this little ob

**ulgarian Tsar, Ivan II Asen, from** **asiyab (Samarqand), or 'a Story** **ment'** *sia), Aleksandr Naymark (Hofstra* hors of this report received a rather
of one side of a little single-sided cuted images and a completely vonic with transposed right and left xt. It was supplied with a note een found by chance on the surface

Samarqand, and that it was made of es of gilding. The object would fit hat are very familiar in Central Asia
tes have yielded almost fifty gold ypes of Byzantine solidi from oth double-sided "imitations" and
crude images and blundered ces of base metal bearing "fantasy" seals, some of which are certainly *at" from Afrasiyab* *eal of Ivan II Asen*
this "bracteate" unique is its date - tion reproduces the "royal" side of sar, Ivan Asen (1218-1241). Yet the med to have a perfectly legitimate

Samanid and Qarakhanid times the ally subsided, the large scale trans-
ring the Mongol period, the very to the time of Ivan II Asen's rule.
the international arena, it seemed the royal seal could have passed rakorum, in which direction many uring the early Mongol era. It is also enced a golden age in Samarqand gol rule and, thus, we might expect
e a little bracteate as a piece of m a seal brought to the city by an es, however, proved to be mere sharp colour images of both sides
clear, that this is a modern brass th modern steel tools. Disappointed ever, could not help being puzzled bject: the very crude execution and
the negligent transposition of the inscription co that it was neither a fake meant to trick a colle Puzzled, we contacted Dr Ilya Prokopov in So that this is a typical "coin imitation" pendant widespread piece of Bulgarian traditional pendants. As these were widely used by Bul they were mass produced for them in the Sovi using all possible Old Bulgarian coin types as p

*Fig. 3. During the presentatio* There remained one last question: how a m Bulgarian folk dancer of the 20 th century cam Asian archaeological site which ceased to be century. The answer is likely to be in the ritua folk dancing was a common feature of Soviet 1930s, with delegations of different republics b their choreographic groups; meanwhile, Sama 2500 th anniversary in 1969 and part of the gala on the site of Afrasiyab. In other words, it is object is a witness to the 20 th century cultural p Soviet bloc.

After the arrival of good scans and of the original interpretation, the authors first consid conference report, but then in the post-Modern decided that this is an instructive instance that i hand the complex life of numismatic and sphrag the other, demonstrates how circumstantial used in our historical studies can easily le conclusions. The authors are also very happy t receive the good scans prior to the conference.

**Boris Kochnev Memorial Seminar on M** **Central Asian Numismatics** On Saturday, 17 March  2012, the Middle Asian Program at Hofstra University will hold on Middle Eastern and Central Asian Numism Boris Kochnev (1940-2002).

If you are interested in presenting a paper, of your talk to Aleksandr Naymark by  Januar form the programme by 1 February. By 1 Mar papers should be available for pre-publi presentations can range from the Caucasus to the earliest times to the late Middle Ages. allocated 20 minutes + 5 minutes for questions.

For more information contact: aleksandr.nay During two previous seminars our speakers (American Numismatic Society, New York), A Sapienza Universita di Roma, Italy), Stefan University, Germany), Judith Kolbas (Central Institute, Cambridge University/Miami Konstantin Kravtsov (Hermitage Museum, St. Dmirtry Markov (Markov Coins and Me Aleksandr Naymark (Hofstra University, Hem
olumns left no doubt ector, nor a souvenir. ophia, who explained from a monisto - a jewelry with coin lgarian folk dancers, et era by craft shops rototypes. *on* monisto "coin" of a e to be on a Central occupied in the 13 th als of the Soviet era:
t festivities from the being represented by arqand celebrated its
festivities were held likely that this little politics in the former e "collapse" of their ered cancelling their nist mode of thinking illustrates, on the one gistic objects and, on
evidence commonly ead to unwarranted that they did actually **Middle Eastern and** Eastern and Central d the Fourth Seminar matics in Memoriam
please send the title ry 1. It is planned to rch brief abstracts of
cation. Themes of Xinjiang, and from Each talk will be ymark@hofstra.edu. were: Michael Bates Arianna D'Ottone (La n Heidemann (Jena l Asian Numismatic

University, Ohio), Petersburg, Russia), edals, New York), mpstead, New York),

Stuart Sears (Wheaton Colleg Treadwell (Oxford University, E Unveristy) and Waleed Ziad Connecticut). Among seminar a such as Ahmad Ghouchani (Teh (Cambridge, England), Li Tieshe scholars and collectors from New ***\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\**** **Numismatic Research at the Br**

Naturally the Oriental section of at the British Museum has felt th His energy, enthusiasm, and responsible for the huge output department and London member study days and other events orga Joe's legacy at the department i encouraged and developed colle the department has two permane Wang (East Asia) and Vesta C number of project staff 2. Joe department continues to be a re London. There are a number of o oriental coins which might be of

Dr Elizabeth Errington's M milestone. She has been work Masson for many years and soo material stored in the British M Charles Masson spent the 1830 important Buddhist sites and al finds were sent to the East India London. When this museum wa some of the coins were transfe majority of coins were auctione from around 500 given to th remained in the India Office libr the British Library collection. T transferred, as a long term loan Masson Project team supported having created online computer r *Fig. 1 An example of a Ma*

Not only did Masson collec many of them very interesting in ahead of his time in record ke Masson collected can be linked Begram, and provides one of assemblages from Afghanistan. collection can find more inform collections database <http://www> The coins from the British Librar museum number "IOLC\*" but

2 The information in this item was Sarkhosh  Curtis, Elizabeth Errin Pendleton ge, Norton, Massachusetts), Luke England), Daniel Varisco (Hofstra

(Yale Univeristy, New Haven, attendees were international guests hran, Iran), Nicholas Sims-Williams
eng (Beijing, China), and numerous w York and the East Coast. ***\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* *** **ritish Museum**
the Department of Coins & Medals he impact of Joe Cribb's retirement.
intellectual guidance is largely t of oriental numismatics from the
s will no doubt appreciate the many anized at the department. However, is more than his own work, he has eagues and various projects. Today ent curators of oriental coins, Helen Curtis (Islamic and Iranian), and a
still visits occasionally and the egular venue for ONS meetings in ongoing research projects relating to
interest to members. Masson Project is nearing a major king on the collection of Charles on all of the numismatic and other

Museum will be available online. 0s in Afghanistan exploring many
lso the urban site of Begram. His a Company's own India Museum in
as shut in 1878 the antiquities and erred to the British Museum. The
ed in 1887 and the residue (apart he Fitzwilliam museum in 1911)
rary and eventually became part of This group of coins has since been, to the British Museum where the
by various colleagues are close to records for every coin and artifact. *asson collection record online*
ct an amazing number of objects, n their own right, he was also well eeping. Much of the material that
back to particular sites, especially the few really useful numismatic

Readers who are interested in the mation from the British Museum's
w.britishmuseum.org/research.aspx. ry can be found by searching for the t probably more interesting is a
kindly supplied by Helen Wang, Vesta ngton, Paramdi p Khera and Elizabeth
general search for "Charles Masson", whic objects, not just coins, in the collection, m Ultimately there will be 11,000 coins and other Royal Numismatic Society will host a lecture on which the team will discuss Islamic and Roman from relic deposits, and how Masson's numi enabled the reconstruction of his collection.

Digitisation of the collection is a priority fo soon to be completed project, managed by Par Project Curator) is the Sikh Coin Catalogue. Th has seen a recent resurgence in interest and p somewhat neglected and overlooked in the Museum catalogue of Sikh coins is scheduled t end of this year and aims to highlight one of collections of Sikh coins and introduce the audience.  This new catalogue focuses on coi currency and includes coins from various Si issued by the Sikh Misals (1760-1801) and 1839).  An introduction to the coins gives a history from the founding of the religion in 14 of the Punjab in 1849 and provides infor denominations, mints, inscriptions, dates a information is followed by a comprehensiv collection that comprises over 500 coins.  It project will provide academic and amateur num a detailed reference work which can be used to more precisely. Also in the realm of South Asia, the muse Project nears its conclusion. All of the Kushan by the end of this year with pictures (3,616 re more than half with images, and another thousa world's most extensive collection of Kushan m extensively used by scholars in the past. Ku several dynasties, the successors of Kujula K 340), the Kushanshahs ( AD 230 to 350), and th to 400), whose territory included Afghanistan, West India. The project will also see the public of the Kushan material some time in 2012. Moving to East Asia, there are a number of underway. The first - Textiles as Money on collaborative project with specialists in China, and France, is examining how silk functioned a Road in the Tang dynasty ( AD 618-907). Th managed by Helen Wang and follows on from h Silk Road money which was published as *Mon* *the evidence from Eastern Central Asia to c.* her work on the publication *Textiles from* *Collections* (2007). Dr Wang is also editing the collected work in a single volume *The Modern Coinage of Chi* *evidence in Western archive*

Like other parts of the collection, work cont Asian collections on to the BM database. Selec available and more is going on all the time, wi possible. This has been possible thanks to various people including the late Nicholas R Nepalese coins and paper money), Alice Lam paper money), Sarah Ng (Chinese coin-shaped c (the United Reformed Church collections). As part of an HLF-funded project, Qin museum experience working with Asian co months at the BM (April - Sept 2011) and ha Manchester Museum for 12 months to work w the Asian coin collection there.

The Department has two large ongoing proj of West Asia, being led by Vesta Sarkhosh Coin Project and the Parthian Coin Project. The Sasanian Coin Project is a collabora Sarkhosh Curtis, Elahe M. Askari and Elizabeth resulted in a two-volume published catalogue coins in the National Museum of Iran.  The first January 2010: *Sasanian Coins. A Sylloge of th* ch brings up 6,089
most with pictures. r objects online. The n 17 January 2012 in n coins, finds of coins ismatic records have for the Museum. One ramdip Khera (ZNM
e study of Sikh coins opularity after being e past.  The British o be published at the
the world's greatest material to a wider ns that circulated as ikh mints that were

Ranjit Singh (1801an overview of Sikh 469 to the annexation
rmation about coin and symbols.  This ve catalogue of the t is hoped that this mismatists alike with o identify Sikh coins eum's Kushan Coins n coins will be online ecords are available, and to follow). As the
material, it has been ushan coins include Kadphises ( AD 50 to
he Kidarites ( AD 330, Pakistan and North cation of a catalogue f numismatic projects n the Silk Road - a Japan, Canada, USA as money on the Silk
his project is being her previous work on *ney on the Silk Road:* *AD 800* (2004), and *Dunhuang in UK* ks of Richard Wright *ina, 1866-1949 - the* tinues to put the East cted parts are already ith images whenever valuable help from Rhodes (Tibetan and mouille (East Asian charms) and Qin Cao

Cao is developing oins. She spent six as now transferred to with Keith Sugden on jects relating to coins Curtis: the Sasanian ation between Vesta h J. Pendleton. It has
of *c*. 4,500 Sasanian t volume appeared in *he Sasanian Coins in*

*the National Museum of Iran (M* *I - Hormizd IV*. Each coin is catalogue. Volume II deals with and will go to press at the en collection of Sasanian coins wi early 2011. *Fig. 2 Parthian tetradrachm o* *Seleucia o*

The Parthian Coin Project (Syllo is a large international collabo including The British Muse (Vienna), Institut für Numism University), National Museum Nationale de France (Paris), Staa Numismatic Society (New Yo l'Africa e l'Oriente. This proje Aacdemy of Sciences and the B The co-directors of the SNP are Sarkhosh Curtis (London). Parthian coins are the most source for a dynasty that was in in the ancient Near East. In th empire stretched from the River E in modern Afghanistan. After th in the ancient Near East, Parthia appearance of the Sasanians at

AD. Despite its importance, this by scholars working on Parthian will be a major source of inform but also about the history, art h Empire. The project will bring toge collections of the participating produce altogether nine volumes responsible for volumes II and IV of Mithradates II ( *c*. 123 - 88 B coins of Mithradates III, Orodes other seven volumes have be participating institutions. ** ** **Book Review** ** ** ***Arabic and Persian Seals and A*** By Venetia Porter. With specia and Alexander Morton; with Bhandare, and scientific ana Humphrey, Nigel Meeks and Ma British Museum Research Publ The British Museum, Great Ru ISBN 978-086159-160-2, pp. viii This is a catalogue of the British Arabic and Persian seals and am understates the scope of the stu other collections and of earlier included in a detailed introducti covered include the influence of on the development of seals and *Muzeh Melli Iran), Tehran. Ardashir* s illustrated and described in the
coins of Khusrau II - Yazdgird III, nd of 2011. The British Museum ill be fully available on Merlin in

*of Phraates (Farhad) IV, mint of * *on the Tigris* * *
ge Nummorum Parthicorum - SNP) oration between many institutions eum, Kunsthistorisches Museum matik und Geldgeschichte (Vienna m of Iran (Tehran), Bibliothèque
atliche Museen zu Berlin, American ork) and the Istituto Italiano per ect is also funded by the Austrian British Institute of Persian Studies. Michael Alram (Vienna) and Vesta extensive and informative primary
power for over four hundred years he second century BC this Iranian

Euphrates in modern Iraq to Bactria he collapse of the Seleucid Dynasty became Rome's main rival until the the beginning of the third century
resource has been largely ignored n culture. The Parthian Coin Project
ation not only about Parthian coins, history and culture of the Parthian ether all the Parthian coins in the
institutions and it is planned to - The British Museum team will be - Volume II will deal with coinage

C ) and Volume IV will publish the III and Pacorus I ( *c*. 57-38 BC ). The een allocated amongst the other

***mulets in the British Museum*** al assistance from Robert Hoyland h contributions from Shailendra alysis by Janet Ambers, Sylvia argaret Sax.
ication number 160. Published by ussell Street, London WC1B 3DG, i + 202, Price £40
h Museum's extensive collection of mulets, as the title makes clear. This udy. The wider field of material in
r studies on seals and sealings is ion of twenty-six pages. The topics
f Byzantine and Sasanian practices d sealings in the Islamic world (pp.
the crusader period. It might have come from cannot be sure of this. The same uncertainty re might claim that it depicts a Greek monogram, a from the Hellenistic or Roman Imperial period lead objects from these periods look different.

However, I would like to suggest a diff conjectural, interpretation here. My approach (w the result of wishful thinking) is the following: resembles the central part of the reverse devi caliph" fulus. On the copper coins as well as however, it is shown standing on three or fo ultimately derived from the depiction of th Byzantine solidi from Tiberius II Constantine On our lead tessera, the lower part looks differ of a Λ. We should remember, though, that in B lower part of the cross on the reverse denomination: the solidi feature the steps, the s tremisses a horizontal line. Thus, even if the lo jeweled cross in the church of the Holy Sepu form as that of the solidi, the depiction was not

The palm branches or bunches of wheat to the device cannot be identified with absolute looking only at our tessera. There are, howeve Byzantine coinage of the 7 th and 8 th centur Tiberius (582-602) to Tiberius III (689-705 ceremonial silver coins - siliquae or miliarensi palm branches on the reverse. From Heraclius ( is the cross potent, the most important symbol o is flanked by the two palm branches. I be depiction is encountered also on our lead obje flank an important symbol, but in the case certainly not the Christian cross potent. It shoul the way the palm branches are depicted on t silver coins fully corresponds to the depiction which to my eye is an important argument suggested here, as well as for the interpretation.

Interestingly enough, the same form of th resembling a Λ - can be seen on a certainly Ear namely on the so-called "mihrab-'anaz approximately at the same time as the "stan Could it be that this is not merely the result of and this is just guesswork, I have to reiterate - same object is depicted in both cases, namely a could represent the ribbons attached to the top o stylised form. On the "standing caliph" fulus, consists of a small circle. I do believe that t appears on the reverses of most "standing calip would be more appropriate to call it the "Um also depicted on the obverses of the Dimashq style issued in the year AH 74 - intriguingly e coins from this year in which also the first dat dinars were struck, but not on the Dimashq drac 73. On these coins, the lower part consists of a s

What to make now of our tessera? If that have to be accepted to date it to the Earl accepted - and that is quite a lot of "ifs" - then would lend credibility to the idea that what reverse of the "standing caliph" coins was an o reality. Clearly, it cannot have been merely a de this assumption is exceedingly unlikely if w obverse image is a well-planned, fully meaningf image. We would also expect the reverse image

5 W. Hahn/M. Metlich, *Money of the Byzantine Emp* *- Revolt of the Heraclii, 565-610*, Vienna 2009, pl. 2 no. 52-55; W. Hahn, *Moneta Imperii Byzantini III.* *III. / Alleinregierung (610 - 720)*, Vienna 1981, pl. no. 137- 141; pl. 35, no. 60 f.; pl. 39, no. 37 f.; pl. 42, 6 L. Treadwell, "Mihrab an 'Anaza" or "Sac Reconsideration of an Early Marwanid Silver Drachm - 223-268.
7 Schindel (as note 1), p. 28-30. m the Levant, but we egards its dating: one and that it might date d, even if, to my eye, ferent, albeit highly which may be merely

The Φ -shaped object ice of the "standing s on the few dinars, our steps which are he cross potent on

(578-582) onwards. rent, taking the form Byzantine coinage the could denote the semisses a globe, the ower part of the real ulchre had the same totally invariable. o the left and right of e certainty if we are
er, close parallels in ry. From Mauricius 5. 5 there exist rare  ia - which show two 610-641) onwards, it of Christianity, which lieve that the same ect: the two branches
of the tessera, it is d be emphasized that these rare Byzantine
on our lead tessera, both for the dating he lower part - also
rly Islamic coin type, za"-drachms struck nding caliph" fulus. 6
f chance? My idea - - is that basically the  a lance. The Φ in fact of the lance in a very
the top of the object the Φ -symbol which ph" coins - maybe it mayyad symbol" - is
drachms in Sasanian enough, only on the ted "standing caliph" chms from AH 72 and small circle. 7 f all the assumptions ly Islamic period are n our small lead piece t is depicted on the
object that existed in e-Christianized cross; we consider that the ful Arab and Muslim e to have had a clear

*ire * *Continued. Justin II* 21, no. 52, 55 f., pl. 32,

*Von Heraclius bis Leo * 9, no. 128 -133; pl. 27, no. 29; pl. 45, no. 69 f. crum and Spear"? A m, *Muqarnas* 22, 2005,
meaning to the people of the tim symbol of sovereignty and v somewhat stylised form. Perhaps a tropaeum, as has been sugges should bear in mind that the orig Golgotha Hill in Jerusalem, and memory of this object to have period, so that 'Abd al-Malik w challenge from this symbol of Ch for the assumption that he respon tangible and really existing obje detail. Both the way it is shown well as on our tessera proves that very similar form to the cross p that it must have been a piv However, after a few years th conclusion that for an Islamic em more fitting not to use any picto imperial propaganda to its fines language and the text of the Qur' **A BRIEF NOTE ON A**

# CALIPH ARAB- B

# PRESUMABLY By Tare q

Every so often collectors come a seen-before coins.  Sometimes th are so subtle that they are almost counterparts and, in other instanc noticeable variation from the nor In the case of the coin in que Standing Caliph coin - there we to write a short note on it. This because of the rendition of the ca strange style and iconography fou *"Skinny Caliph" obverse*

As is visible from the photos a 'skinny' and is depicted with th and face, and a short beard with or a *kafiyya*.  His 'girdle band' s it while his *dishdasha* consist additional patterns. The obverse most of it is not clear and only pa four steps and a large sphere-th orb. An eight-pointed star is si sphere near the words " *mu* ḥ *amm*
right, going downwards, reads completing the second half of th Greek letter ϕ ** ** (Phi) separates remaining portion which makes

8 Goodwin (as note 1), p. 24. 9 Tony Goodwin. *Sylloge of Islamic C* *Pre-* *reform Coinage of the Early Isla* Ashmolean Museum Oxford 2002, me. I think that it could have been a
ictory which was depicted in a s it was a lance; maybe some sort of sted by Goodwin. 8 In any case, we ginal cross potent was erected at the d that we can at least expect some
e survived into the Early Islamic was facing a kind of propagandistic hristianity. This is another argument
nded by countering with an equally ect, whatever it might have been in n on the "standing caliph" coins as
t it was used in a propagandistically potent of Byzantium, another proof
votal symbol for 'Abd al-Malik. he caliph apparently came to the mpire, it was more characteristic and orial device at all, but rather to limit t and highest achievement, namely an.

# "SKINNY" STANDING **BYZANTINE COIN** **Y FROM AMMAN** ** ** q Ramadan across peculiar, intriguing, or never-
he coins contain characteristics that t indiscernible from their immediate ces, there is strong deviation or very
rm (for that type or from that mint). estion today - an Arab-Byzantine
re enough subtleties to provoke me particular coin caught my attention aliph on the obverse and the slightly und on the reverse.

*Large sphere-through-pole * *reverse; no mint* above, this standing caliph appears
in arms and a large, roundish head h some remnants of either long hair
shows three strings emanating from ts of vertical ruffles without any e legend is of the 04-type, though
artially visible. 9 The reverse depicts hrough-pole which is capped by an
tuated to the left of the steps and *mad ra*..." ( ). On the upper
s "\[ *ra* \]... *s* ū *l* *all* ā *h* " ( ) he Islamic declaration of faith. The
that part of the legend from the s up the first half of the Muslim

*Coins in the Ashmolean* Volume 1: *The* *amic Period*. pg. 94
*Fig. 3: dirham, al-Mu* ḥ *ammadiyya 171, al-Ras*

*Am* ī *r al-Mu'min* ī *n, H* ā *rith,* ṣ a *Islamic Coin Auction London 13* One of the al-H ā r ū niyya reverse types (fig. 2) i name the one-year-old Mu ḥ ammad, son administrative establishment that was created in seems to have been turned over to his son, reverse, from the same die, is combined with (788), one bearing the mint name al-H ā r ū niyya al-Mu ḥ ammadiyya (fig. 3). The latter name cannot be the famous citadel of al-Rayy found grandfather Mu ḥ ammad al-Mahd ī when he w Rather, it must be the same construction as alfor little Mu ḥ ammad, the future al-Am *Mu* ḥ *ammadiyya* instead of *al-Mad* ī *na al-H* ā *r* ū *n*

As will be shown, this location is the mi identify H ā r ū n ā b ā d and al-H ā r ū niyya this w long-standing problems. Previously, most scho these two mint names with a place said to have caliph al-Rash ī d H ā r ū n in the eastern mountain As Vasmer argued in rebuttal, 18 it is most im have said impossible) that dirhams inscribed *Ir* been minted in another province. Their assign province also eliminates the contradiction betw 168-71 and the history which puts the Cilicia renaming, in 183. It is no longer necessary speculations to explain the names of governors of a Cilician mint. 19 And the "bewildering num mint" 20 is explicable in parallel with the same fe of (the second) al-Mu ḥ ammadiyya and Ma'din B

The 171 dirham with the mint-name al-M first of a long dirham series dated AD 171-19 805, 808-12) that has heretofore been catalogu Mu ḥ ammadiyya of Rayy. The entire corpus o mint name in al-Rash ī d's reign form a most com several different reverse types in almost every as ten in 182. The on es attributable to al Armenia are generally those with names ab reverse such as Ṣurad 21 (174-95), Sall ā m (172-9 77, 182-95; these might be two different D ā ' ū frequent names. In contrast, the dirhams nam generally identified as the powerful Barmakid s are probably all official issues of Rayy. As this of different names on the Armenian Mu ḥ am fifteen, subject to future research. The Muḥammadiyya 171 - 72 and al - Hārūniyya 171 Ṣurad, making him the longest survivor of thes to the mint names al - Hārūniyya and Ma'din Bā al - Muḥammadiyya. Ṣur ad and Sall ā m are of (172-77, 186-94), but each of these two is als officials.

There are two groups of officials that are those like Sall ā m who are named above

17 Al-Bal ā dh ū r ī, *Fut* ū *h*, 113. 18 In Anderson, *Kochtel*, 21. 19 Bonner 1989, 175-81. 20 Miles, *Rare Islamic Coins*, 60; Bonner 1989, 182. 21 The index volume to the SUNY translations of a person named Ṣurad (b.  'Abd Allāh al - Azdī), bu Sulaymān and Zuhayr, who are Ibn Ṣurad. Zuhayr is of these have to do with the reign of al - Rashīd; ̣Ṣard, a *sh* ī *d, Mu* ḥ *ammad b.* ad * * *3, 116* is the earliest coin to
of al-Rash ī d. The n the name of H ā r ū n, because that same two obverses of 171

| (fig. 2) and the other | e, on this evidence, | ded by Muḥammad's |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| was governor there. | -Hārūniyya, renamed | mīn, al-Madīna al- |
| iyya. | ine of Bājunays. To | way resolves several |
was governor there. -H ā r ū niyya, renamed m ī n, *al-Mad* ī *na al-*

*iyya*. ine of B ā junays. To way resolves several olars have identified been founded by the ns of Cilicia in 183. 17 mprobable (he could

*rm* ī *niyya* would have nment to the correct ween the coins dated an foundation, or its
to invent elaborate of Armenia on coins mber of issues at this eature of the dirhams B ā junays. Mu ḥ ammadiyya is the 0 (and 193-97; 787ued with issues of al- of dirhams with this mplicated series, with
year, up to as many l - Muḥammadiyya in bove and below the

94), and D ā ' ū d (170ū ds), as well as less ming Ja'far, who is secretary of al-Am ī n, s is written, the count mmadiyya dirhams is
letter ṣ *ad* on al is likely to represent e officers, connected ājunays as well as to ften named together so named with other mutually exclusive: e the reverse field al - Ṭ abar ī lists only one
ut there are two men, s also Abū Ṣurad. None as a name, is wrong.
inscriptions and those like Ṣura named above is ever named suggested, are probably mine ag classes. Like most other gove probably paid in advance every y their investment by the profits suspects that one of the two sets right to buy silver from the mine these officials was named on the in. Some of these coins he used t Each buyer, named below on th authority of different senior offic who also had a share in the prof eye on each other, obviously. explanation of the several rev H ā r ū niyya, al-Mu ḥ ammadiyya, a *Fig. 4:dirham,  al-Mu* ḥ *ammad*

*Mu* ḥ *Shamma collection =* In 186 (802) Umm Ja'far, wife o Mu ḥ ammad, begins to be named Mu ḥ ammadiyya. She is named thereafter until 190 (805-06), su had transferred his rights in the m appears on the coins. The dirham more common than those witho continue to appear, with Umm position of her name above the r the person named there was senio

In 190 (805-06) there are attributable to the mine except t any at all so attributable for sev dirhams naming Umm Ja'far beg Ma'din B ā junays, "the mine of B unique coin in Berlin 23 ). From 19 Ja'far, accompanied by some of mine (Dā'ūd, Sallām, Ṣurad, 'Ub names without Umm Ja'far, as w *Fig. 5: dirham, al-Mu* ḥ *ammad* *American Numismat*

22 Nicol 1979, 111. These men, or \` ā *mil*, "agent," like the \` ā *mil* of the Ṭ abar ī II, 1943. 23 Nützel 1228. 24 Vardanyan 2011, 92-96. ad who are named below; no one
below. These names, as Nicol 22 gents of some sort, evidently in two ernment officials of the era, they
year for their position, and recouped s of their office. Inparticular, one s of officials monopolised the legal
ers and take it to the mint. Each of e coins made from silver he brought
to buy more silver from the miners. he reverse, might operate under the
cials, named at the top of the field, fits. Why two officials? To keep an

A model of this sort suggests an verse types in each year at aland Ma'din B ā junays.

*diyya 186, al-Am* ī *n, Umm Ja'far,* ḥ *ammad* = Spink Zurich 27 383a
of al-Rash ī d and mother of al-Am ī n d on dirhams with the mint name al-
d on such dirhams in every year uggesting that her son, now sixteen,
mine to her, although his name still ms with her name seem to be much out, but some of the former names

Ja'far or in pairs without her. The reverse is the slender evidence that or to the one named below.
e no al-Mu ḥ ammadiyya dirhams those of Umm Ja'far, nor are there veral years, but in that year similar gin to be minted with the mint name

B ā junays" (in 190 represented by a 90 to 196 these dirhams name Umm
the names already assignable to th e bayd), or have one or two of those well as new names such as Masr ū r. 24 *diyya 187, al-Am* ī *n,* m ī m *, 'Ubayd* *tic Society 1972.79.269* one set of them, probably had the title Ban ī Sulaym mine in 128 (745 -46), al-
This brief survey omits many anomalies and loose ends. More research will be needed to establish securely which alMu ḥ ammadiyya dirham types are to be assigned to B ā junays, which are from al-Mu ḥ ammadiyya of Rayy, and which possibly are from other places, such as a location in the Maghrib and a mint in the Khazar land (just over the mountains from B ā junays). Two special methodological tools will be helpful. A full die study of all dirhams with the mint names H ā r ū n ā b ā d, al-H ā r ū niyya, al-Mu ḥ ammadiyya and Ma'din B ā junays, and also if possible those with the mint names Irm ī niyya and Ifr ī qiya, will probably turn up more die links between B ā junays types as well as define other groups that may be attributable elsewhere. Trace element analysis of the silver in dirhams from those mints will certainly fingerprint the dirhams made from B ā junays mine silver, enabling the identification of dirhams made of the same silver from the mints of Armenia, the Khazars, H ā r ū n's capital al-Rus ā fa, and Mad ī nat al-Sal ā m where alAm ī n Mu ḥ ammad and Umm Ja'far resided. *Bibliography*

Anderson, Walter. *Der Chalifenmünzfund von Kochtel*. *Mit Beiträgen von* *Richard Vasmer*. Dorpat, 1926. Al-Bal ā dhur ī. *Kit* ā *b Fut* ū *h al-Buld* ā *n*. Ed. M. J. de Goeje, Leiden, 1866. Bonner, Michael. "The Mint of H ā r ū n ā b ā d and al-H ā r ū niyya, 168-171 H.," *American Journal of Numismatics* 2nd series, 1 (1989), 171-93. Dikshit, K. N. "A Coin of the \`Abbasids found at Paharpur, Bengal," *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal* 30 (1934), Numismatic Supplement XLV, 75-76. Ghazarian, H. M. *Armenien unter dem arabischen Herrschaft*. Marburg, 1903.  Ghewond, *History*: Translated Robert Bedrosian, 2006: section 37 <http://rbedrosian.com/ghew8.htm> Ghewond, *History*: Translated Zaven Arzoumanian, *History of Lewond: The* *Eminent Vardapet of the Armenians*. Wynnewood, Penn., 1982, section 37.  Hewsen, Robert H. *Armenia: A Historical Atlas*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001. al-Husayn ī, Muhammad B ā qir. "Dir ā s ā t al-kun ā wa'l-alq ā b \`al ā al-nuq ū d alisl ā miyya al-madr ū ba bi'l-Rayy (al-Muhammadiyya)," *al-Mask* ū *k* ā *t* 7 (1976), 169-91. \[Ilisch, Lutz\]: An extremely important series of al-Muhammadiyya dirhams of al-Rashid, precisely described, Leu auction 62, nos. 413 ff. Khodzhaniyazov, Tirkish, and Luke Treadwell. "The Marv Hoard of Early Islamic Dirhams," *Iran* 36 (1998), 85-94. Miles, George C. *The Numismatic History of Rayy*. ANS Numismatic Studies 2. New York, 1938. Miles, George C. *Rare Islamic Coins.* ANS Numismatic Notes and Monographs 118. New York, 1950. Nicol, Norman Douglas. *Early \`Abb* ā *sid Administration in the Central and* *Eastern Provinces, 132-218 A.H./750-833 A.D.* Ph.D. thesis, University of Washington (Seattle), 1979. \[Nützel, H.\]. *Königliche Museen zu Berlin. Katalog der orientalischen* *Münzen*, I: *Die Münzen der östlichen Chalifen*. Berlin, 1898. Pitarakis, Brigitte. "Mines anatoliennes exploitées par les Byzantins: Recherches récentes," *Revue Numismatique* 1998, 141-85. P. 164 for Bajunays, wrongly located. al-Qazz ā z, Wid ā d. "al-Dirham al-\`abb ā s ī f ī zaman al-khal ī fa H ā r ū n alRash ī d," *Sumer* 21 (1965), 167-227. al-Tabar ī, *Ta'r* ī *kh*. M. J. de Goeje *et al.*, editors, as *Annales quos scripsit* *Abu Djafar Mohammed Ibn Djarir at-Tabari*. Leiden, 1879-1901; reprint 1965.  al-Tabar ī. *The History of al-Tabar* ī, XL: *Index*. Alex V. Popovkin, editor; Albany, N.Y., 2007. Ter-Ghewondyan, Aram. *The Arab Emirates in Baghratid Armenia*. Translated by Nina G. Garsoian; Lisbon, 1976. Vardanyan, Aram. *Islamic Coins Struck in Historic Armenia*, I: *Arm* ī *niya,* *Arr* ā *n (Mad* ī *nat Arr* ā *n), Barda\`a, Dab* ī *l, H* ā *r* ū *n* ā *b* ā *d / al-H* ā *r* ū *niya and* *Ma\`dan B* ā *junays; Early \`Abb* ā *sid Period (142-277 AH / 759-891 AD)*. Yerevan, 2011. Vasmer, R. *Chronologie der arabischen Statthalter von Armenien unter den* *Abbasiden von as-Saffach bis zur Krönung Aschots I.*, 750-887. Studien zur armenischen Geschichte, 5; Vienna: Mechitharisten-Buchdruckeri, 1931.  Vryonis, Speros, Jr. "The Question of the Byzantine Mines," *Speculum*, 37 (1962), 1-17 (p. 6 for B ā junays). ** **

**THE COINAGE OF TAQ** Ī **KH** Ā **N DURR** Ā **N** Ī **,** **REBEL IN KIRM** Ā **N** By A. Akopyan (Moscow), F. Mosanef (Tehran) After the death of N ā dir Sh ā h, Iran descended into civil war. During this period, Kar ī m Kh ā n Zand, who succeeded in conquering his rivals, tried to stabilise his rule throughout Iran. The province of Kirm ā n after the death of N ā dir was ruled by the local governor, Sh ā hrukh Kh ā n Afsh ā r, who was recognised by the Afsharid kings, c Adil Sh ā h and Sh ā hrukh. But in fact Sh ā hrukh Kh ā n Afsh ā r ruled in Kirm ā n independently and refused to send tax to the Afsh ā rids. As a result, in AH 1172, Kar ī m Kh ā n Zand sent Khod ā Mur ā d Kh ā n Zand to capture Kirm ā n. Sh ā hrukh Kh ā n passed away before Khod ā Mur ā d Kh ā n reached there; as a result, Kirm ā n was easily captured and put under the control of the Zand governor. 28 The rule of Khod ā Mur ā d Kh ā n continued until AH 1176. In this year Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī, who was a coal seller and a hunter, on his way from his family village of Durr ā n, came to Kirm ā n to sell his coals, and bring a hunted ibex to present to the governor. He was, however, insulted and beaten in Khod ā Mur ā d Kh ā n's palace. 29 Because of this, he decided to take his revenge and returned to Kirm ā n with 300 of his friends and relatives. They entered Kirm ā n in the middle of the night and attacked Khod ā Mur ā d Kh ā n's residence, where they killed him along with thirty of his guards. Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī  then took control of Kirm ā n, whereupon he declared himself ruler and his brother, A ḥ mad Kh ā n, sheriff of the city. Kar ī m Kh ā n Zand was shocked at the events which had happened in Kirm ā n and sent an army under two of his commanders, Am ī r G ū ne Kh ā n Afsh ā r and Mu ḥ ammad Am ī n Kh ā n Gar ū ss ī, in AH 1177 to the city. But the two commanders fell out and fought each other before reaching Kirm ā n, with the result that the army returned to Sh ī r ā z without any result. 30 The second time, Kar ī m Kh ā n sent an army under the sole command of Mu ḥ ammad Am ī n Kh ā n. Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī  attacked the Zand army several times but finally left the city and escaped to a mountainous area in the suburbs. 31 Kirm ā n was captured by the Zand army in AH 1178, after four months. The Zand governor of Kirm ā n who had not been successful in repressing Taq ī Kh ā n, decided to attack him in the mountainous area. Mu ḥ ammad Am ī n Kh ā n Gar ū ss ī was defeated by Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī  and fled from Kirm ā n. Kar ī m Kh ā n who was surprised at the defeat of his governor, after his arrival at Sh ī r ā z on the 2 nd of Ṣ afar 1179, sent Taq ī Kh ā n Bafq ī, who was the governor of Yazd, to repress the rebellion in Kirm ā n. But before any serious engagement between the armies of Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī  and Taq ī Kh ā n Bafq ī could take place, the latter, fearing defeat, escaped to Yazd in disgrace. 32 This time Kar ī m Kh ā n sent one of his bravest commanders, c Al ī Kh ā n Sh ā hsavan, with his troops to Kirm ā n, and they succeeded in surrounding Kirm ā n. One day during this siege, when c Al ī Kh ā n was reviewing his troops beside the walls of the city he was killed by a sniper. The death of their commander discouraged the troops, and they returned to Sh ī r ā z. Taq ī Kh ā n, who now felt more confident, considered himself a serious rival of Kar ī m Kh ā n in Kirm ā n and south-eastern Iran and asked other areas to send him taxes. In the spring of AH 1179 (Rama ḍā n or Shaww ā l), Kar ī m Kh ā n sent troops under the command of Nadhar c Al ī Kh ā n Zand towards Kirm ā n. Nadhar c Al ī Kh ā n surrounded the city for some time until, with the inhabitants facing hunger and starvation, Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī  decided to escape to his village in the mountainous area. This time, however, when he 28 M ī rz ā Mu ḥ ammad Ṣā diq M ū sav ī I ṣ fah ā n ī. *T* ā *rikh-i G* ī *t* ī *Gush* ā. Tehr ā n, SH 1366. P. 90-91; Ḥ ajj M ī rz ā Ḥ asan Ḥ usayn ī Fasay ī. *F* ā *rs n* ā *me-ye N* āṣ *iri*. Tehr ā n, SH 1388. Vol. I. P. 601. 29 Mu ḥ ammad H ā shim Āṣ af. *Rustam al-tav* ā *r* ī *kh*. Tehr ā n, SH 1352. P. 375. 30 *T* ā *rikh-i G* ī *t* ī *Gush* ā. P. 117-119, 136; Re ẓ a-Qol ī Kh ā n Hed ā yat. *R* ūḍ *at al-* ṣ *af* ā *-ye N* āṣ *iri*. Tehr ā n, SH 1385. Vol. XIII. P. 7159-7162. 31 *T* ā *rikh-i G* ī *t* ī *Gush* ā. P. 140; *R* ūḍ *at al-* ṣ *af* ā *-ye N* āṣ *iri*. P. 7161-7162. 32 *T* ā *rikh-i G* ī *t* ī *Gush* ā. P. 140-142; *R* ūḍ *at al-* ṣ *af* ā *-ye N* āṣ *iri*. P. 7162; *F* ā *rs* *n* ā *me-ye N* āṣ *iri*. P. 608-609.
secondly, to get the cash into their hands, imposed a severe financial burden on the exchequer, led to an increasing indebtedness to wealthy moneylenders and the need to carry on further expeditions year after year. The system of ceding financial rights oriented to specific territories (later perfected as 'subsidiary alliance' by Lord Wellesley) meant more imperial provinces could be promised away in return for political gains. Indeed, such promises made to the Marathas in the decade before Panipat saw them get into increased political wrangling. The history of the Marathas leading to Panipat is, thus, a story of realising economic 'hard facts' on the one hand and territorial expansion, political responsibilities and personal valour on the other. One of the major sub-plots of the story leading to Panipat has attracted a lot of attention, particularly in nationalistic history-writing of the 20 th century. This is the episode wherein Sadashiv Rao Bhau allegedly 'destroyed the Mughal throne of Delhi' in August 1760 - an act which the nationalist historians view as the ultimate defiance of the 'alien' Mughal sovereignty, perpetrated through the agency of the 'resurgent regional nationalism' of the Marathas. As we will see further, the aim of this action was much more mundane than the glory thus attributed to it - in fact the 'throne' was never destroyed, just the lining above it was removed; the lining was made of silver and silver was needed to strike coins so that Bhau could feed his starving  army. While the incident itself is very widely known, no attempt has hitherto been made to identify and attribute the coins that were struck as a result of it. And this is not by any means the only instance in the story of the 'Panipat Year' to feature coins - there are indeed more, and they more or less share the same attributive fate (or lack thereof!). The primary aim of this paper is, therefore, to investigate these instances from a numismatic viewpoint and to provide a wider historical context to them, so they can be understood as significant elements of the 'Panipat' story. In addition, it will bring forth publication of new numismatic data and a discussion about questions of attribution. At the outset, it must also be noted that much of the exercise in attribution undertaken here depends on a careful reckoning of the events, as they unfolded, with AH dates and regnal years (RY) of the rulers in whose name the coins were struck, in particular the Mughal emperors, Alamgir II, Shahjahan III and Shah Alam II and the Afghan kings, namely Ahmad Shah Durrani and his son, Taimur Shah, as his deputy or 'nizam', for the province of the Punjab. At the end of the paper, I have appended a reckoning chart for AD dates, corresponding to these chronological details. The historical sources I have utilised include vols. 1 and 2 of Sir Jadunath Sarkar's masterpiece, 'Fall of the Mughal Empire' (Sangam Books, London / Orient Longmans, Bombay, 1991) and 'Panipat 1761', an impressively analytical Marathi account by T. S. Shejwalkar (Pune, 1993). 'The Rise and Decline of the Ruhela Chieftaincies in 18 th century India' by Iqbal Husain (OUP 1994) also serves as an important source for Indo-Afghan history. Amongst other Marathi primary sources, ' *P* ā *nipatch* ā *Sangr* ā *m* ', a collection of papers and excerpts from non-Marathi textual sources pertaining to Panipat, edited by N. R. Phatak and Setumadhav Rao Pagdi (Mumbai, 1961) provides some useful details pertaining to coinage. Marathi historical narratives or 'Bakhars' are often considered an important secondary source of information when it comes to Maratha History. *Bh* ā *us* ā *heb* ā *nchi* *Bakhar* (ed. S. N. Joshi, 8 th (critical) Edition, 1965), an 18 th century narrative in this genre contains some information about money supply and coining undertaken by the Marathas at Delhi and Panipat. For numismatic details, I have made use of 'Maratha Mints and Coinage' by K. K. Maheshwari and K. W. Wiggins (IIRNS, Nasik, 1989. and the 3 rd volume of the Punjab Museum Catalogue, entitled  'Coins of Nadir Shah and the Durrani dynasty' by R. B. Whitehead (Oxford, 1934). Numismatic data has been sourced from institutional, virtual and private sources. The on-line database <https://www.zeno.ru> has provided some images, while coins from the collections of Jan Lingen (the Netherlands), Stan Goron (UK), JP Goenka (Kolkata/Mumbai), Aman ur-Rahman (Dubai) and the Stevens Collection (on long term loan c/o the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), have been used to illustrate key numismatic points. I most gratefully acknowledge the help and support these gentlemen have given me. Thanks are also due to Jan Lingen and Stan Goron for discussing some worthwhile numismatic aspects featured in the article and to Stan and Paul Stevens for having
a preliminary read and making suggestions. ***Maratha Involvement in Delhi Affairs, c. 1752 - 1757*** By the mid-18 th century, the Marathas had become a force to be reckoned with in Indian politics. Of the north Indian provinces, Gujarat and Malwa had been brought under their control by the early 1750's. Their involvement in the affairs of provinces further north was the direct cause of the ambitions of the Afghan king, Ahmad Shah Durrani. The province of the Punjab had been surrendered to Nadir Shah of Iran after his invasion of India in 1739, but after Nadir Shah's murder in 1747, it had gradually reverted to descendants of the Mughal governors of the province and held nominally by them under Mughal sovereignty. Ahmad Shah, being the successor of Nadir in the eastern part of his kingdom, laid his claim to the Punjab as his political 'patrimony'. After a first, unsuccessful attempt in 1747, he had managed to secure a foothold in the Punjab during his second invasion of the Punjab in 1749. As his forces advanced to Lahore for a third time in March 1752, taking advantage of the on-going strife between the emperor and his wazir, Safdar Jang, the latter concluded a defensive treaty with the Marathas. Under the articles of this treaty, the Marathas were assured a sum of 3 million rupees to keep the Afghans at bay. They were also given the right to collect a quarter of the revenues from the imperial provinces of the Punjab and Sind. The Peshwa's generals were to be received at the imperial court like other high officers of the empire. In return, the Peshwa along with his generals undertook to defend the empire from foreign invaders. He was also to bring rebellious courtiers, local rajas and *zamindars* to heel. Before the Marathas could appear at Delhi, however, Safdar Jang's plot was thwarted by the emperor, who acted on the counsel of his confidant, the eunuch Javid Khan, and ceded the province of Punjab to the Durranis. Despite this, Mir Mannu, the Mughal governor of the province, managed to keep it under his control by nominally changing his allegiance to the Durrani king. As for the Marathas, although the power rested in the hands of the Peshwa, Balaji Bajirao, the 'movers and shakers' so far as north India was concerned were his younger brother, Raghunath Rao, and trusted lieutenants, Malhar Rao Holkar and Jayappa Sindhia. After their conquest of Malwa and Gujarat, the Marathas were seen as key players in various power disputes in north India. They became embroiled in two campaigns in the early 1750's - one was the war of succession in Jodhpur and the other was the conflict with Surajmal, the Jat raja of Bharatpur. Both these involvements were marred by important casualties on the Maratha side - Jayappa Sindhia was murdered at Nagore while pursuing the Jodhpur campaign and Khande Rao, Malhar Rao's only son, was killed in the battle of Kumbher while fighting against the Jats. After Jayappa's demise, Sindhia affairs passed into the hands of his young son, Jankoji, who was mentored by his uncle, Jayappa's younger brother, Dattaji. After 1752, following Ahmad Shah Durrani's third invasion of the Punjab, politics in the Mughal court quickly slid into anarchy. Key events in these years were the rebellion, ousting and subsequent death of the wazir, Safdar Jang and the rise of 'Imad ul-Mulk as the new wazir and 'king-maker'. 'Imad ul-Mulk Ghazi ud-Din II, was the young grandson of Nizam ul-Mulk Asaf Jah I by his eldest son, Ghazi ud-Din I Firuz Jang. In the beginning of 1754, the relations between the emperor, Ahmad Shah Bahadur, and 'Imad ul-Mulk, who was then the *Bakhshi* (paymaster general) of the empire, rapidly deteriorated. 'Imad had his eyes on the office of the wazir, which was held by his rival, Intizam ud-Daula, after Safdar Jang's death. To realise his ambitions, 'Imad had to seek the help of the Marathas, as he had very few supporters in the imperial court to help him. The Marathas made peace with the Jats and marched to Delhi to 'Imad's aid. His bid for power was thus successful - Ahmad Shah Bahadur was deposed on 2 nd of June 1754 and thrown into confinement together with Intizam udDaula. 'Imad became the new wazir and proclaimed Alamgir II, the son of Jahandar Shah, as the new emperor. East of the Punjab, in the northern Gangetic plains of north India, another polity of Afghan descent had taken root from the mid-17 th century. These Afghans were the descendants of landholders who had been settling in the region under Mughal patronage displacing the local Rajput ruling class. Their forefathers were adventurers and
mercenaries who had left the barren Afghan heartland in search of a better life. Collectively they were known as 'Ruhelas' and the region in which they inhabited came to be known as 'Ruhelkhand'. ('Ruhela' is the more accurate version for the anglicised 'Rohilla' and I have chosen to use the former over the latter.) The Ruhelas traditionally harboured hostility to the 'Irani' faction in the imperial court at Delhi and as such were 'daggers-drawn' towards the Wazir Safdar Jang. In the 1750's, a Ruhela named Najib Khan, emerged as the most prominent amongst these 'Afghans gone native' in India. By the mid1750's he had become established in a town he named after himself as Najibabad and wielded considerable influence in the district of Saharanpur. The intrigues between 'Imad and the emperor had fired his ambitions to covet the high imperial office of the wazir, which 'Imad had only just managed to secure for himself. The promises 'Imad made to the Marathas were very difficult to fulfil given the bankruptcy of the imperial treasury. The Marathas raised their claims to an impossible sum of 8.25 million rupees. 'Imad could pay only a fraction of this huge amount. The Marathas launched severe depredations in and around Delhi for the rest of the year to exact money. The country was plunged into disorder. Najib Khan was quick to take advantage of this situation and stood in open defiance of 'Imad. At the heart of his machinations was of course his ambition to oust 'Imad and become the wazir himself. By early 1755, 'Imad had managed to turn the Marathas away from Delhi by promising them the remainder of the money through bankers' advances and committing the revenues of some imperial provinces in the south Gangetic Doab. Only a small Maratha force remained at Delhi under the command of Antaji Mankeshwar. 'Imad then tried to bring the Ruhelas to heel by his own strength. He attacked Najib Khan but, with the financial ruin the empire was facing, the campaign ended in dismal failure. Furthermore, the campaign against Najib Khan, elicited a response from his kinsman, the Durrani king, from across the Indus.

***The Afghan Invasion of the Punjab and North India 1756-57*** Ahmad Shah Durrani had two immediate reasons for launching his fourth invasion of the Punjab - the first was the infighting involving rival claimants to the governorship of the Punjab that had erupted following the death of the former governor, Mir Mannu, and the second was the war against his kinsmen, the Ruhelas, that was waged by 'Imad. The Afghan king marched to Lahore in October 1756 and occupied the city. He then appointed his protégé, Khwaja Abdulla, as the governor. The counter-claimant, Adina Beg, fled towards his domains in east Punjab and thence to Delhi, with the Afghan army in hot pursuit. Ahmad Shah's presence in the Punjab came as a boon to the Ruhelas, as the invading Afghans came to the aid of their brethren settled in India. The Durrani campaign ended in the sack and plunder of Delhi in early 1757. The Afghans subsequently sacked the Hindu holy city of Mathura. However, the advancing north Indian summer was not a season the Afghans were accustomed to. A cholera epidemic broke out, forcing the Afghan army to return to their homeland. On his way back, Ahmad Shah re-installed the beleaguered emperor, Alamgir II, on the throne in Delhi and gave the wazirate back to 'Imad ul-Mulk. But he left Najib Khan at the helm as the 'plenipotentiary' with supreme command of affairs. In May 1757, Ahmad Shah halted at Lahore on the way to Kabul from Delhi and proclaimed his son, Taimur Shah, as the 'nizam' (deputy) for the *subahs* of the Punjab. However, the 'unholy alliance' which Ahmad Shah Durrani created between Alamgir II, 'Imad and Najib Khan was doomed from the word go as none of them trusted the others. As soon as Ahmad Shah turned his back, 'Imad plotted against Najib with the emperor's complicity. Once again, he managed to gain Maratha support in his bid - the Marathas under the command of Raghunath Rao attacked Delhi  in August 1757 and besieged Najib Khan. He could not hold out against them and made a truce, cleverly negotiating through Malhar Rao Holkar to seek a pardon for his life and safe passage to Najibabad, his fief across the Yamuna River. Raghunath Rao reluctantly conceded and let Najib leave. However, the Marathas were aware of the fact that the continued Afghan presence in the Punjab would help bolster the Ruhela position any time and this came to be a constant threat to any
political arrangements arrived at in Delhi. For this reason, they decided to rid the Punjab of the Afghans and restore the province to the Mughal faction. ***The Marathas in the Punjab, 1758 - 1759*** At the end of January 1758, the Maratha troops of Raghunath Rao and Malhar Rao Holkar assembled around Delhi and began their bid to free the Punjab. Soon after Taimur Shah became the 'nizam' of the Punjab in May 1757, a minor incident involving some of his Afghan troops and a Sikh village headman triggered a major Sikh rebellion, which plagued the Punjab (November 1757 - February 1758). Durrani authority began to falter. Adina Beg Khan, the contender for the governorship of the province under the Mughals, had been appointed Taimur Shah's deputy to govern the eastern part of the Punjab. He saw a chance to reassert his ambitions coming. Taking advantage of the lawlessness in the Punjab, the complicity of Adina Beg Khan and the rebellious Sikhs, the Marathas launched their campaign by capturing Sarhind on 21  March. During the siege, Adina Beg openly defected from the Durrani ranks and joined the Marathas in a renewed bid to secure the governorship of the Punjab. Invigorated by the capture of Sarhind, Raghunath Rao marched on to Lahore. With no Afghan resistance beyond Sarhind, and Adina Beg on their side, the Marathas arrived at Lahore in less than two weeks' time. Taimur Shah's position in Lahore thus became precarious. He had not enough food, the countryside was ravaged by Sikh rebels and no help could be sought from across the Khyber, as Ahmad Shah had been busy quelling rebellions in the west of Afghanistan. Taimur, therefore, decided to abandon the city and flee westwards crossing the river Ravi. Lahore came into Maratha possession on 10 April 1758. Raghunath Rao duly appointed Adina Beg as the governor of the province and the latter promised to pay an annual tribute of 7.5 million rupees for this favour. As Adina Beg was an old hand in managing the affairs of the province, he pacified the Sikhs and appointed his son-inlaw, Mirza Khan, as his deputy at Lahore. With these arrangements in place, the Marathas turned back to Delhi. Raghunath Rao returned to Pune in September 1758, where he received a hero's welcome. This 'Pax Maharashtrica' lasted only for five months. In October 1758, Adina Beg suddenly died and, with his death, disorder once again erupted in the Punjab. Afghans and Gakkhars from across the Jhelum threatened the province. Mirza Khan, the late Adina Beg's deputy at Lahore, became the effective governor of the province. With the help of Maratha troops left behind, he tried to push the Gakkhars back. The anarchy in the Punjab prompted the Peshwa to order one of his ablest commanders, Dattaji Sindhia, to take charge and restore order to the province. Dattaji had met Raghunath Rao in Malwa, during the latter's journey to Pune, Raghunath Rao had been acutely aware of the folly he was obliged to commit at the behest of his old and trusted commander, Malhar Rao, which was to keep Najib Khan free to cause further intrigues. He, therefore, counselled Dattaji to try and annihilate Najib Khan. Thus Dattaji set out to the north with two main aims - to restore the Punjab to the Marathas, and to vanquish Najib Khan. He also faced the task of collecting arrears of tribute including that from the Delhi government. Of these, the first objective was accomplished with relative ease. Dattaji's armies were vast in comparison to the brigands who had usurped the command of the Punjab. In April 1759, Dattaji's troops reached the eastern part of the Punjab, where they were received by the late Adina Beg's son. Dattaji dispatched Sabaji Sindhia to Lahore and restored order, taking over the governorship and the administration of the province. With the Punjab firmly back in Maratha hands, Dattaji turned his attention to his other goal - that of bringing Najib Khan to heel. But Najib managed to entrench himself in the fortress of Shukartal. Dattaji had no alternative than to launch a siege and hope to bring Najib to surrender by starving his troops out of resources. The siege dragged on for much longer than expected and Dattaji's army became entangled in it. The tide then began turning against the Marathas. Ahmad Shah Durrani finished with his campaigns in western Afghanistan about the same time. He now had time on his hands to re-assert his rule in the Punjab. His ally, the Ruhela Najib Khan, was now facing Dattaji's threat and he made incessant appeals to his powerful Afghan kinsman
to come to his rescue. He also employed a malicious rhetoric to further his politics - he gave the conflict a markedly religious turn in order to garner support against the Marathas. This rhetoric was articulated by Shah Waliullah, a powerful clergyman, in a series of letters to Ahmad Shah in which he exhorted the Afghan king to rescue the Islamic empire of India from the tyranny of Maratha infidels. Taking advantage of the fact that Dattaji was busy at Shukartal, the Afghans crossed the Indus and advanced towards Lahore. Without Dattaji's help, his governor, Sabaji, chose to abandon Lahore. The Afghan onslaught was so powerful that they not only re-occupied Lahore, but chased the fleeing Maratha armies across the Punjab. Sarhind was taken back from the Marathas on 27 November 1759. Dattaji hurriedly lifted the siege of Shukartal against Najib Khan and rushed to the help of the Maratha army fleeing the Punjab. The Afghans forded the Yamuna River and joined ranks with their Ruhela kinsmen. Together, their armies defeated the Marathas on 22 December near Thanesar in Haryana. Dattaji fell rapidly back towards Delhi and pitched camp at Barari Ghat, 10 miles north of Delhi. The final blow came on 9 January 1760, when an Afghan marksman managed to shoot Dattaji dead while he was reconnoitring just outside his camp. Having killed the commander, the Ruhelas charged against the Marathas, who fled in disarray. They were chased and slaughtered by the Afghans. Dattaji's nephew, Jankoji, managed to reach the realms of his ally, Surajmal, the Jat Raja of Bharatpur. The Afghans occupied Delhi in late January 1760. After occupying Delhi, Ahmad Shah entrusted the affairs of Delhi to an able Afghan governor named Yaqub Ali Khan. Politics in Delhi had taken another turn in the meantime. The wazir, 'Imad ul-Mulk, found the emperor Alamgir II's ambitions too lofty for a servile puppet, and murdered him on 29 November 1759. He then installed a prince, supposedly a grandson of Kam Bakhsh, the son of Aurangzeb, as 'Shahjahan III' on the throne. After the Maratha defeat in January 1760, he fled from Delhi, fearing an Afghan backlash. Ahmad Shah then launched a campaign against the Jats and the Marathas. Malhar Rao Holkar had been sent by the Peshwa to aid Dattaji, but he fell short of the purpose as Dattaji was killed. He had then joined forces with Jankoji Sindhia in the safety of the Jat heartlands, but the Sindhia-Holkar armies were attacked and defeated once more by the Afghan alliance on 4 March. After this victory, the Afghans decided to station themselves at Aligarh, in Najib Khan's territories, to brace themselves against the advancing north Indian summer, which they found hard to bear. Sarkar (vol. 2, p. 148) mentions that 'the political centre of gravity shifted from Delhi to the Doab'. The Maratha occupation of the Punjab thus lasted for almost a year. The news of the loss of the Punjab and the chain of defeats following the death of Dattaji Sindhia caught the Peshwa while in a celebratory mood - his cousin, Sadashiv Rao, alias Bhau, who so far had been managing the financial and administrative side of the Peshwa's domains, had proven his military skills as well, having scored a major victory at Udgir against the long-standing foe of the Marathas in the Deccan, the Nizam of Hyderabad. Now a fresh expedition to north India was needed to eject the Afghan invaders - an expedition more powerful than all the previous ones. The Peshwa's brother and an old north India hand, Raghunath Rao, would perhaps have been the one most suitable to lead it. But the Peshwa was not impressed by his lack of statesmanship in leaving Najib Khan free, as well as his tribute management whilst on his previous campaign. The Peshwa, therefore, decided to give the command of this momentous expedition to Sadashiv Rao Bhau. He met him when the latter was on the way to Pune from his Udgir campaign and directed him to proceed to the north. A massive army was gathered for this campaign. Almost every Maratha nobleman, retainer of armed bands, and feudal lord was summoned to mobilise his troops for the campaign. Added to these, there were mercenary soldiers from the corps won over from the Nizam of Hyderabad. Thus began the last Maratha effort against the Afghans, the effort that was to culminate in the battle at Panipat almost a year later.

***Sadashiv Rao Bhau's Expedition to Delhi and the Battle of Panipat,*** ***1760-1761*** Bhau left the Deccan soon after his appointment as the commander of the expedition to expel the Afghans on 13 March 1760. Accompanying him was Vishwas Rao, the Peshwa's oldest son, only a teenager at the time. There were several Maratha noblemen in Bhau's retinue, including the old north India hands, Malhar Rao Holkar and Jankoji Sindhia. But the army was burdened with a civilian presence as well - all the nobles came with their families and other household staff; there were itinerant traders, suppliers of fodder and grain and other tradesmen. Taking advantage of the security afforded while travelling with an army, large numbers of people joined the expedition, so they could undertake pilgrimage to holy Hindu cities such as Mathura in the vicinity of Delhi. As regards financing this massive expedition, Bhau's position was rather precarious. The army was already in arrears for the previous north Indian campaigns. Bhau had just enough money to keep the army on the march, but he depended heavily on his revenue collectors to supply him with specie, so that not only the army could be paid but the supplies and munitions for the expedition could be secured, the farther he went from the Deccan. The record of the Maratha revenue collectors like Govind Ballal Bundélé and Naro Shankar was not admirable. There was room to believe that they had resorted to personal enrichment instead of remitting the dues to Pune. Govind Ballal had established himself in the lower Doab, making Itawa his headquarters. His sway extended to Jalaun, Konch and Kalpi. Naro Shankar had made Jhansi his base. Bhau had been in charge of finance before embarking on his military career and his management style had antagonised these collectors. Unless they paid for it, the expedition was doomed to suffer from financial starvation. And this is what happened - with his large retinue, Bhau took more time than he expected to get beyond the Chambal River, which he did on 8 June 1760, just when the monsoons were advancing. Larger rivers lay in their way, like the Yamuna and the Gambhir, and the Marathas had to ford them to engage with the Afghan alliance which was camped across the Yamuna in the Doab region. But the rivers flooded and the Marathas had to wait till they found it safe to ford them. In the meantime Bhau negotiated with other political powers in the region to make a coalition against the Afghans and to ensure steady financial help. The Jats were firmly on the Marathas' side but Shuja' ud-Daula, the Nawab of Awadh, who was a key player, was wavering about whom to pledge his support to. All Bhau wished was that he remained neutral if he could not be an ally. Five weeks passed during which Bhau learnt that his arch-rival, Najib Khan Ruhela, had managed to turn Shuja' ud-Daula to the Afghan cause. Najib's religious rhetoric - of articulating what was an Indo-Afghan conflict into a 'Hindu-Muslim' conflict - paid off in Shuja's case. But although Shuja' joined the Afghan alliance, he kept his involvement limited as he was deeply mistrustful of the Ruhelas. As the days went by, Bhau's finances began to dry up. Govind Ballal bore the brunt of Bhau's anger - many letters written to him by Bhau are available in which Bhau pours scorn, and cynicism over the old man. Local land-holders had turned their positions into small fortresses in anticipation of the political turmoil and coughed up a bit of money every time they were threatened. However, what Govind Ballal could get his hands on using the limited force he had, was not enough for Bhau's huge retinue. Bhau was particularly anguished by Shuja' ud-Daula's betrayal, given the good relations his father, Safdar Jang, had harboured with the Marathas, and ordered Govind Ballal to launch punitive expeditions into Awadh territory. This further added to the old man's woes. But Bhau refused to relent; he even turned down an offer of peace made by Ahmad Shah Durrani in May 1760. Financial problems made the Marathas turn towards Delhi. Here Yaqub Ali Khan, the Afghan governor, was in charge with Shahjahan III still on the throne. The puppet emperor's mentor, 'Imad ul-Mulk, had been hiding with his friend, the Jat Raja Surajmal. The flooded Yamuna River had cut off Delhi from the Doab region so the Afghan army could not come to the aid of Delhi's governor. Thus, the city seemed a relatively easy target. The Marathas attacked Delhi on 22 July and, after a series of skirmishes, exhausted Yaqub Ali Khan's defence. On 3 August, Delhi once again came under Maratha possession.
While at Delhi, Bhau's financial worries grew. Nothing worthwhile either as money or as materials had been received from revenue collectors like Govind Ballal. Bhau was, therefore, forced to entertain a 'three-point' proposal from Shuja' ud-Daula that would give peace a chance. Shuja' offered to broker a truce provided Shahjahan III was deposed, Shah Alam, the son of Alamgir II, was proclaimed emperor in his place and Shuja' was appointed as his wazir. But this would amount to the removal of 'Imad from the office of the wazirate. As 'Imad was a friend of the Jat Raja, Surajmal, the mere consideration of such a proposal by Bhau antagonized Surajmal towards him. He left the Maratha camp in a huff. This was a blow to Maratha diplomacy as they were greatly dependent on Surajmal's support. Surajmal's estrangement only added to Bhau's financial woes and, by September, even the high noblemen in the Maratha camp were starving for food. One of the measures which Bhau undertook to alleviate his pecuniary woes has gone down in Maratha history. On 6 th August, Bhau took down the thick, beaten silver lining that adorned the roof of the *Diw* ā *n-i-Kh* ā *s*, or 'Hall of Private Audience', in the imperial quarters inside the Delhi fort and sent it to the mint to get it coined into rupees. A total of 0.9 million rupees are said to have been coined out of this silver. This episode is referred to by Marathi texts such as *Bh* ā *us* ā *heb* ā *nchi Bakhar*, as one of calamitous impunity - even the estranged Surajmal is said to have come to Bhau in person and requested him 'not to destroy the sanctity of the site where Mughal sovereignty had been enshrined'.  But nationalist Maratha histories of the 20 th century often regard it as an act of ultimate defiance of the Mughal authority by any Maratha soldier/statesman. However, the nationalist pride attached to this episode is very much misplaced, for Bhau always maintained he was safeguarding the nominal Mughal suzerainty in the face of an impending Afghan threat. The rupees coined out of the roof lining lasted Bhau for a month. At the beginning of October, starved of funds and unable to engage with his enemy across the Yamuna as the river remained in flood, Bhau resolved to push northwards in search of money. His primary target was Kunjpura, a fortified town in the charge of a Ruhela named Najabat Khan, where plenty of grain and wealth had been stored by the Afghans anticipating a prolonged North Indian campaign. Bhau's larger plan was to recapture Sarhind and cut the Afghan supply lines running eastwards from the Punjab to the Doab. But before he could get to Kunjpura, Bhau thought he could placate Shuja' ud-Daula so as to cause a rift in the Afghan ranks. He, therefore, decided to execute the proposal Shuja' had suggested. On 10 October 1760 Bhau sent two Maratha agents to Delhi and deposed Shahjahan III. Shah Alam II was proclaimed as the emperor in absentia (he was in Bihar). His investiture was further solemnised by appointing Mirza Jawan Bakht, his son, as the *Wali Ahd*, or crown prince and by striking coins in the name of the new emperor. Shuja' was declared the new emperor's wazir. Bhau arrived at Kunjpura to find Abd us-Samad Khan, the Afghan governor of Sarhind, and Qutb Shah, a Ruhela leader and chief perpetrator in Dattaji Sindhia's killing, camped outside the town to aid Najabat Khan. After a quick and decisive battle the Marathas captured Kunjpura on 13 October. Both Abd us-Samad Khan and Najabat Khan were killed in the battle while Qutb Shah was captured and executed in revenge for Dattaji's death. Kunjpura yielded plenty of arms, ammunition, food and money to the starving Marathas. But the exultations from this victory were short-lived. On 25 October, the Afghan allies bravely forded the flooded Yamuna River at Baghpat and appeared at the rear of Bhau's army. Bhau's game thus turned on himself - he was cut off with a vast Afghan army between him and his base in Delhi. A quick crossing into the Doab across the Yamuna River could have proved a good strategy, but so unwieldy was Bhau's retinue that he simply could not do that. Bhau turned southwards and the two armies came within striking distance at Panipat. In the meantime, the Afghans cut this last resort off by offering stiff resistance from across the river. The stalemate continued for the last two months of 1760 with the Marathas camped at Panipat. As the loot from Kunjpura was consumed by the Maratha army in these two months, starvation ensued once again. Bhau again pleaded with Govind Ballal to open a 'second front' against the Afghans in the Doab and send money and supplies to the army besieged at Panipat. As
a last resort, he melted vessels, plates and many such gold and silver objects to strike coins and make money available. Bhau's last hopes were dashed when Govind Ballal was killed while carrying out a raid against the Afghans on 17 December. With him gone, the Afghan supply lines were restored without any hindrance. They managed to foil every attempt by the Marathas to supply their comrades stuck at Panipat. In the first week of January 1761, a treasure sent by Maratha partisans was looted. Bhau had no other choice but to brace his army and attempt to break through the Afghan lines. The beleaguered Maratha leaders strategized to make a tight circular formation, surrounded by artillery which could then break into the Afghan army and move southwards, cutting through enemy lines. The decisive day was 14 January 1761. On that day, the battle began in the early hours of the morning. Superior military tactics by Ahmad Shah won the day for him - by afternoon, the right flank of the Maratha formation had been breached by the Afghans, thereby breaking the circular formation. The Maratha stratagem failed and their army was in tatters. In late afternoon, Vishwas Rao, the young son of the Peshwa was shot and, following him, Bhau disappeared into the chaos never to be seen again. A headless body, thought to be that of Bhau, was cremated at Panipat on the day after by Hindu Brahmin ministers in Shuja' ud-Daula's camp. Carnage followed and the Afghans slaughtered a great number of Marathas as they fled towards Delhi. Those lucky to survive were able to group together a couple of hundred miles to the south, in the relative safety of the Jat kingdom. Even before the Maratha entrapment at Panipat, the Peshwa, Balaji, had started towards the north from Pune with a fresh army to aid his beleaguered cousin. But when news of the debacle reached the Peshwa, he was heartbroken. He returned to Pune where the disaster took its toll on him - he rapidly lost his health and died on 23 June agonising over the loss of his beloved cousin, Bhau. The victorious Ahmad Shah Durrani entered Delhi on 29 January 1761. For the months of February and March he lived in the imperial  palace in Delhi and held court in the Hall of Private Audience. This last Afghan occupation of Delhi was no different in terms of depredations from the previous one. Ahmad Shah's troops looted and pillaged the capital and, when it was all over, demanded to return to their homeland to escape the savage north Indian summer. Ahmad Shah left Delhi on 20 March after recognising Shah Alam II as emperor, reappointing 'Imad ul-Mulk as the wazir and appointing his favourite, Najib Khan Ruhela, as *Mir Bakhshi* or paymaster-general. But Shah Alam II could never reconcile himself to 'Imad, the killer of his father. Thus Najib managed to outwit 'Imad and get himself appointed as regent. Najib dominated the politics in the decade after Panipat in north India, till his death on 16 October 1770. His patron, Ahmad Shah Durrani, died at Qandahar a little more than two years later. Only 'Imad ul-Mulk outlived everyone else - he died at Kalpi a lot later, in 1800! ***Maratha Coinage at Delhi - First Phase, August - October 1760*** This brings us to the 'numismatic' part of this paper where I will describe and discuss the numismatic legacy of the Afghan-Maratha conflict in the final year. First we will deal with Maratha coinage during 1760. It focuses on Delhi, while a discussion about coinage at two other places, namely Sarhind and Panipat, will follow in the subsequent section. The last section will contextualise Durrani coinage in the same period and that following the Afghan victory at Panipat. As we have seen in the historical description, the Marathas under Bhau were involved in two events which explicitly dealt with coinage at Delhi - the first was when Bhau took down the silver roof lining of the Hall of Private Audience and had it coined into 0.9 million rupees, which happened on 6 August 1760, and the second was when he proclaimed Shah Alam II as emperor (10 October 1760) and ordered coins to be struck in his name while the city was still under Maratha control. While both these episodes are very well known, no attempt has been made to identify which coins the Marathas struck in these instances. As the coins were struck in Delhi, one would presume they carried the mint-name as 'Dar al-Khilafa Shahjahanabad', and as Shahjahan III was on the throne with Maratha acknowledgement, they would be struck in his name. From the viewpoint of type description, such coins come with only one kind of obverse legend - the kind which quotes his name, which goes:
## مبارک بادشاه غازی شاه جہاں

*sikka mub* ā *rak b* ā *dsh* ā *h gh* ā *z* ī *sh*

* * The reverse legend bears the following formul mint-name appearing at the top -

## حد جلوس ضرب دار الخJ فہ شاه جہان آباد

*m* ā *n* ū *s maimanat sanah a* ḥ *d jul* ū *s* ẓ *arb d* ā *r al-k*

6 August 1760 was only a week before the AH y 1174 began (13 August 1760). As Shahjahan throne since 29 November 1759, he would hav of his reign during August - October 1760 (he the AH year changes in August, his first regnal AH 1173 and AH 1174.

Since the Marathas occupied Delhi only to AH 1173, one would imagine that at least Shahjahan III of Delhi (Shahjahanabad) mint *a* ḥ *d* can be regarded as Maratha issues. The Shahjahan III which have the AH date 1173 classified depending upon the placement of the has the date in the last line (fig. 1, gold moh Zeno 71219), while the other has it in the seco inscription (fig. 3, silver rupee, Zeno 85694). W struck by the Marathas is what needs to be answ

*Fig. 1 Mohur, * *AH* *1173* * * *a* ḥ *d,* * * *in the name of Shah* *third line of the obverse*

*Fig. 2 Rupee, * *AH* *1173 a* ḥ *d, in the name of Shah* *third line of the obverse*

*Fig. 3 Rupee, * *AH* *1173* * * *a* ḥ *d,* * * *in the name of Shah* *the second line of the obver*

The situation regarding coins dated AH comparison. The Marathas were definitely in c

AH 1174 from the inception of the year on 13 A was deposed in October. This would mean that III of Shahjahanabad mint dated AH 1174/RY *a* Maratha issues without doubt. These coins are known only of one type - t second line of the obverse inscription (fig. 4, go rupee). Apart from the placement of the date, other salient differences in layout and executio are engraved with a bold hand somewhat lack finesse. The mint-epithet is inscribed associated

## سکّہ مب ā *h jah* ā *n* laic inscription with the

## مانوس ميمنت سنہ اح *khil* ā *fah sh* ā *hjah* ā *n* ā *b* ā *d* year 1173 ended and AH
n III had been on the ve been in the first year
nce the RY *a* ḥ *d* ) but as l year would span both owards the very end of some of the coins of t, bearing AH 1173/RY ere exist two types of

- they can be broadly  e date. One type of coin
ur; fig. 2, silver rupee, ond line of the obverse Which of these types was wered. *h Jahan III, date in the* *h Jahan III, date in the* *h Jahan III, with date in* *rse* H 1174 is clearer by
control of Delhi during August till Shahjahan III
t all coins of Shahjahan *a* ḥ *d*, can be regarded as
that with the date in the old mohur; fig. 5, silver, these coins also have on. In general the letters king the usual Mughal d with the mint-name in
the top line of the reverse legend where it appears in the second name. A half rupee of this type, (Fig. 6, Zeno 73752). There rem struck in Delhi under Maratha au

*Fig. 4 Mohur, * *AH* *1174* * * *a* ḥ *d,* * * *in t* *in second* *Fig. 5 Rupee,* *AH* *1174 a* ḥ *d* *Fig. 6 Half rupee,* *AH* *1174 a*

If the coiners in the mint f would presume that the coins stru carry the AH date 1173 as it hap Going by the evidence of style suggest coins bearing the date execution to those bearing 1174 to the Maratha issues) could momentous episode. These woul described (i.e. AH date in the se except that the date in this case w fig. 3 above can, therefore, be th to the Marathas, struck before th could well be one of the 0.9 mill of the Hall of Private Audience. ** ** ***Maratha Coinage at Delhi - Sec*** The second episode in which received some numismatic atte monograph (Maratha Mints and one. However, they have comple coinage they discuss is that produ of the *Diw* ā *n-i-Kh* ā *s*, which hap sources they employ to describ Bhau's instatement of Shah Alam To confuse matters further, their and thus the conclusion they d identified is wrong.

We have already described struck with the silver lining of th separate out the conflation of which Wiggins & Maheshwari coinage that happened in Octobe

Wiggins & Maheshwari according to them, in the Ma collection of letters and précis sources for the battle of Panipa Pagdi (Bombay, 1961). The firs d; this is unlike the coins dated 1173,
line and dissociated from the mintdated AH 1174/RY *a* ḥ *d* is also known mains little doubt that these coins were uthority during August-October 1760.

*the name of Shah Jahan III, with date * *d line of obverse* *d, in the name of Shah Jahan III* *a* ḥ *d, in the name of Shah Jahan III*
followed the calendar accurately, one ruck out of the silver roof lining would ppened a week before that year ended.
of execution, it will be reasonable to 1173 but exactly similar in style and (which can be conclusively attributed
well be those struck during this ld be the coins of the type we have just econd line of the obverse inscription),
would be AH 1173. The coin shown in he most likely candidate for attribution
he AH year changed on 13 August. It lion rupees Bhau struck out of the roof

***cond Phase, October 1760 onwards*** * * h Bhau undertook coinage at Delhi ention in Wiggins & Maheshwari's

Coinage, p. 140-141), unlike the first etely conflated the two episodes - the uced out of the silver lining of the roof
ppened in August 1760, whereas the be it refer to the coinage following m II which took place in October 1760.
r analysis of the description is flawed draw on how this coinage is to be d what could be the Maratha issues he roof in August 1760. This helps us
events in August and October 1760 i created. We can now address the
r 1760. referred to two letters, published arathi work *P* ā *nipatch* ā *Sangr* ā *m*, a
translations of non-Marathi historical at, edited by N. R. Phatak and S. M. st of these letters is dated 14 October
1760, and is from Sadashiv Chimnaji (that is Bhau) to Govind Ballal Gosavi (which is the same as Govind Ballal Kher, Bhau's revenue farmer, the word 'Gosavi' being an honorific).  The letter, as quoted by Wiggins & Maheshwari, states - "Nana and Appaji Jadhav have been sent to Delhi on 36 th \[sic\] Safar, they have issued Gajshahi coins in the name of Ali Gauhar. The coins were put in circulation". The second letter is undated and its contents, as Wiggins & Maheshwari quote, are - "Gajshahi Sikka in the name of Ali Gauhar have been struck. In your  province please issue Gajshahi Sikka in the name of Shah Alam". Wiggins & Maheshwari concluded (p. 141) from these quotes that the coins stuck in October 1760 in Delhi by the Marathas were 'Gajshahi', i.e. "the coins struck in Delhi... had on them the mark of a *gaja* (a mace or a club)". They further contend that "the *gaja* mark is known on coins of the \[sic\] Gwalior, Datia and Orchha states". They also remark that "...they were struck in the name of Ali Gauhar and also with the name of Shah Alam and bore the mint-name Shahjahanabad". When the source employed by Wiggins & Maheshwari is consulted afresh, a number of discrepancies in this assessment become apparent. Firstly, there are four letters in *P* ā *nipatch* ā *Sangr* ā *m* that refer to the events in Delhi in the context of Bhau's reinstatement of Shah Alam II as the emperor - only the first and the second are mentioned by Wiggins & Maheshwari, but they do not include the word 'Gajshahi' at all! Quoted hereunder are all four references - 1. The reference made in the first letter is (p. 3 of *P* ā *nipatch* ā * * *Sangr* ā *m* ) - चरंजीव राज 	ी नाना, आपाजी जाधवराव यास दलस

पाठ वले. यांनी छ ३० सफर  अल गोहर याचे नांवचे

गज!श#के केले. शहरात &ाह 'फरवल. याचे पु )ास

बाहेर काढून वल हद केले. सव - अलमास खुशाल  जाहल .

लोकांनी नजरा के या.!श#के चालते जहाले. मोठा समारंभ केला.

*(Nana and Appaji Jadhavrao were sent to Delhi. On 30* *th* *Safar, they* *made 'Gajsikka' in the name of Ali Gauhar. He was proclaimed in the* *city. His son was brought out and declared heir apparent. The world* *was pleased. People made presentations (to the son). Coins were made* *current. The event was celebrated with great pomp.)* 2. The second letter, on p. 6, is fragmentary and thus undated but,  judging by its contents (scorn over inefficiency in remitting cash), it is evidently a fragment of a letter from Bhau to Govind Ballal. Here it is stated -

अल गोहरचे पु )ास वल  आहद शु 1वार केले. गज!श#का

अल गोहरचा केला. आपले तालु 'कयांतह शाहा आलमाचा गज!श#का चालवणे.

*(Aligohar's son was made the heir apparent on Friday. 'Gajshikka' * *was \[made in\] Aligohar's \[name\]. Render Shah Alam's 'Gajshikka'* *current in your province, too.)*

3. The third is a letter on p. 12, dated 9 November 1760 sent to  'Lalajee', or Lalaji Ballal Gulguley, the Sindhias' representative at the Rajput court of Kotah. It has some scribal errors but states -

याब 3ल वत -मान यैकतच तथून दलस आल गोराचा पु ) 6छापून 78त8नधीव याकडे आण पातशाह गज!सका

अल गोरा:या नावे ठहराउन तो बाह र बंगालास आहे या कर ता यैसे क \<न कूच केले.

*(The report as we have heard is that as Ali Gohar is in Bengal his son * *was installed at Delhi as his representative and 'Gajsika' was made in* *the name of Ali Gohar. Then \[he\] began the march.)*

4. The fourth reference is to be found in a letter dated 23 November  1760, sent by 'Balwantrao Ganpat', that is Balwant Rao Mehendale, a Maratha nobleman and Bhau's cousin, to 'Baburao Baba', Balwant Rao's brother. It refers to -

इकडील वत -मान तर, आि?न शु @ 78तपदेस अ लगोहर

याचे लेकास वल हद दलंत क \<न बस वले. गज!श#का

अ ल गोहराचा क \<न, दलचा बंदोब 6त क \<न, नारो शंकर यांस तेथे ठे वले.

*(The report from here is - on the first day of the first half of the month * *of Ashwin, Ali Gohar's son was made heir apparent in Delhi.* *'Gajshikka' was made \[in the name\] of Ali Gohar and Delhi was* *fortified, Naro Shankar was kept there in charge.)*

As can be seen from these references, the term uniformly used by all of them is 'Gaj-Shikka' or 'Gaj-Sikka', not 'Gajshahi Sikka'. Had it been the latter, one could take to mean a particular kind of coin and Wiggins & Maheshwari would have been well justified; but since it is not, the inference they drew that the coins struck in October 1760 by the Marathas at Delhi might have had 'a mace or a club'-like symbol on them is erroneous. It is worth investigating if the term 'Gaj-sikka' (or 'Gaj-shikka') of the letters refers to coins in this context and also what it means, at all. The dictionary of Marathi historical words ( *Aitih* ā *sik Shabdakosh*, ed. Y N Kelkar, Pune) does not list it as a composite word but one finds 'Gaj' and 'Sikka' or 'Shikka' listed separately. What the latter means is fairly clear - seal, coin or stamp. The meaning of 'Gaj' in Marathi differs with how the 'J' is pronounced; as Marathi speakers will know,

'J' is written by a single character ज, but pronounced in two ways -. either as a voiced affricate like J in English, or as a voiced sibilant
close to Z in English. One of the meanings, when ज is pronounced as a voiced sibilant, is 'standard of measurement of length', coming from the Persian 'gaz'  گز or 'yardstick'. Indeed, measures introduced by prominent rulers and administrators are known after their name such as 'Shivashahi Gaj' introduced by Shivaji, or 'Malik Ambaree Gaj' introduced by Malik Ambar, the prime minister of the Nizam Shahi rulers of Ahmadnagar. This word, used in context with and as a composite with 'Sikka/Shikka' (stamp) must therefore relate to standards of 'weights and measures'. It is, therefore, likely that the term employed in the Maratha letters refers broadly to weights and measures being made current in the name of Shah Alam II. The words '!श#के चालते जहाले ' (coins became current) which refer to coins but occur separately from the composite word 'Gaj-sikka' in the first letter indicate this clearly. Furthermore, it is conceivable that the composite word is used as part of a phrase - to 'render weights and measures current in a ruler's name' could thus mean a reference to the initiation a regnal reckoning for the newly instated emperor. The deployment of the word 'Gaj-sikka' must therefore be construed to mean a 'regime change' at Delhi and the transfer of sovereignty from Shahjahan III to Shah Alam II. It is therefore evident that the word 'Gaj-sikka' does not refer to a particular variety of coins. By the far the clearest reference to coining in Delhi in the aftermath of Bhau's installing Shah Alam II as the emperor there comes from another Marathi source, *Bh* ā *us* ā *heb* ā *nchi Bakhar* (critical edition by SN Joshi, Pune, 1965) although it is described in reverse chronological order, i.e. before the episode involving coining rupees from the silver lining of the ceiling, rather than after it. In section 104 (p. 103 of the book) it is said - मग भाऊसाहेब यांणी अल गौर चकते याचा पु ) चौदा

वषा Dचा शहाजादा होता यास त Eतीं बसवून याचे नावे ---
Shahjahan III, RY *a* ḥ *d* of Shah Alam II by R end on 17 November (8 Rabi us-Sani 1174). An after 25 October (15 Rabi al-Awwal 1174), an (8 Rabi us-Sani 1174), would therefore bear RY

The last of the possibilities is of an issuing the region around Delhi, and was well disposed to have followed a regnal reckoning initiated well have been such an authority - as we shall struck coins in the name of Shah Alam II dat (re)-investiture by Bhau in mints under their com preceding issues in the name of Shahjahan II these coins, they could well have done so even a at Panipat - in fact the possibility that they specie for the retreating Marathas cannot be enti ***Other mints following Bhau's command***

Bhau's instruction to 'make coins in the name o your provinces' is also validated by numism earlier, this order comes in a fragmented letter Bhau to his revenue farmer, Govind Ballal, wh Indeed, we have coins in the name of Shah A mint, bearing RY1 or *a* ḥ *d* (Fig. 13 - St Ashmolean Museum). This coin bears the nonAlam II with a distinct 'Trisul' mark on t Maratha affinity. As Govind Ballal was killed i coin must have been struck between October an *Fig. 13 Rupee of Itawa in the name of Sh*

Maratha allies such as the Jats also seem to instructions as evident from a rupee of Akb 1174/ *a* ḥ *d*, struck in Shah Alam II's name (fig. 1

*Fig. 14 Rupee of Akbarabad in the name of Sha*

Noteworthy in the execution of this coin is t phrase ' ḥā *m* ī *d* ī *n* ' in the couplet on the obve written separately as  حامی دين whereas on mo
written as a single word  حاميدين ***Postscript: Maratha Coinage at Panipat (and S*** The Marathas are said to have struck coins whi at Panipat, before the final battle. But the eviden only from the Marathi narrative *Bh* ā *us* ā *heb* ā *n* reliable archival sources are totally silent about said narrative (p. 116-117 of S. N. Joshi's edit an account of 'a famine of food and finance'

## दाम दु Gकाळ ') in Bhau's camp at Panipa

## narrativist notes सो 8नयाची कडी व FIयाची चीजव 6

## 8नवडून टांकसा Kयापासून (manuscr

## टंकशाळा घालून, मोडून आटणी घाल Ruhela reckoning would
ny coins struck by them nd before 17 November Y *a* ḥ *d* of Shah Alam II.
authority that existed in d towards the Marathas,
by them. The Jats can see below, they indeed ted 1174/ *a* ḥ *d* after his mmand, following from

- If the Jats did strike  after the Maratha defeat Jats did so to provide irely ruled out.
of Shah Alam current in matic evidence. As said
r written most likely by hose base was at Itawa. Alam II from the Itawa
tevens Collection, c/o -couplet legend of Shah
the obverse indicating in December 1760, this nd December. *hah Alam II, a* ḥ *d*
have followed Bhau's barabad mint dated AH 14). *ah Alam II,* *AH* *1174 a* ḥ *d*
the orthography of the erse - here the word is ost other Jat issues, it is ***Sarhind), 1760***
ilst stuck in a stalemate nce to this effect comes *nchi Bakhar*; the more
it. In section 117 of the tion, *ibidem* ), one finds

## ' (' अ Mन दु Gकाळ व

## at. In this context, the

## 6तू होती 8ततकN

## ript variants - एक

## लून ) भाऊशाह  व

## म हारशाह व जनकशाह  त

## पैस

(Gold rings and silver wares wer a mint-master - variants: by op 'Bhaushahi', 'Malharshahi' and made. Even then, the money was

While this reference indic Marathas resorted to striking wh at Panipat, the coins have ne reference in the *Bakhar*, they 'Bhaushahi', 'Malharshahi' and from a respective Maratha comm only Bhau to be the person resp melting objects of precious m distinguished the three kinds of well be something like an initial

The reference from the *Bak* century historians of the Marath Parasnees, and thence by Wiggin to this, Wiggins & Maheshwari a 14 October 1760, from Sadash Gosavi, published in the collect "Ali Gauhar coins have been se emperor's mint, the name of Maheshwari then comment, "I statement that the coins bore the Ali Gauhar instead of Shah Alam

However, a careful review o *Sangr* ā *m* did not reveal any such & Maheshwari attribute to this early for the Marathas to have e after they captured Kunjpura and rather than Panipat. It is obvious coins given by Wiggins & Mahes from *Bh* ā *us* ā *heb* ā *nchi Bakhar* Kincaid & Parasnees, is either co thus, no tenability for the inferen name these coins must have had

There does exist, however Sarhind mint in the British Mu struck in the name of Shah Alam *a* ḥ *d*. *Fig. 15 Rupee of Sarhind in the*

Sarhind was firmly under th Afghan governor, Abd us-Sama when they captured Kunjpura o presence at Sarhind in the immed already been an established min struck coins there in the year f plausible that the Marathas mig name 'Sarhind' if they did under is very unlikely that coins in th been struck while Sarhind was f only possible contenders to have the Marathas. The fact that Ma during this period indicates it mi pseudo- mintname. As Marathas period, this is a plausible location

One might argue that Sarhin Panipat - but it must be borne in

## तमाम मोहरा व Fपये केले. तर 

## सा पुरेना.
re collected and through the agency of perating a mint, melted them down -

'Janakshahi' mohurs and rupees were s not enough.) cates with some certainty that the
at effectively was 'emergency money' ever been identified. Going by the
were presumably of three kinds - 'Janakshahi', each taking their names mander - even though the *Bakhar* takes
ponsible for providing the bullion by metals. What characteristics helped
coins remains unknown, but it could of the concerned person. *khar* was taken verbatim by the 19 th
has Messrs C. A. Kincaid and D. B. ns & Maheshwari (p. 162). In addition
also quote a letter from Panipat, dated hiv Chimanji (sic) to Govind Ballal
tion *P* ā *nipatch* ā *Sangr* ā *m* - it states, nt to Delhi...on which, instead of the
this mint is inscribed". Wiggins & It may be inferred from this brief e mint name of Panipat and the name m".
of the letters published in *P* ā *nipatch* ā * * h letter! Furthermore, the date Wiggins
letter (14 October) appears to be too encamped at Panipat - it is only a day d so they must have been at Kunjpura
that the information about the issue of shwari, barring the more famous detail
that they quote second-hand from onfused or erroneous or both. There is,
nce they have drawn about what mint and in whose name they were struck., an enigmatic and unique coin of useum collection (fig. 15), which is m II, has the date AH 1174 and the RY

*e name of Shah Alam II, * *AH* *1174 a* ḥ *d*
he control of the Durranis before its ad Khan, was killed by the Marathas
n 13 October. There was no Maratha diate aftermath, but, given Sarhind had nt in the region (indeed, the Durranis
following the battle of Panipat), it is ght have struck coins with the mintrtake any minting activity at Panipat. It he name of Shah Alam II could have firmly under Durrani occupation - the
e struck this coin would, therefore, be arathas were never present in Sarhind ight have been struck elsewhere with a
s were camped at Panipat during this n for the mint. nd is located at quite a distance from n mind that the only lines of supply the
Marathas had any access to, ran through the Sikh possessions and Ala Singh, the Sikh chief (whose descendents later went on to form the princely state of Patiala), was their ally. With this in mind, it is conceivable that a 'Sarhind' rupee was likely to find more favour in the procurement of food and fodder for the Marathas and they might have, therefore, resorted to just such a coin. This is, however, only a guess - but at least a calculated and educated one. ** ** **Appendix 1**

***AH*** ***/*** ***AD*** ***concordance for the period (*** ***AH*** ***year = begins*** ***AD*** ***date to ends*** ***AD*** ***date)***

$$ AH 1170 = 26 September 1756 to 15 September 1757 $$

$$ AH 1171 = 15 September 1757 to 9 September 1758 $$

$$ AH 1172 = 9 September 1758 to 24 August 1759 $$

$$ AH 1173 = 25 August 1759 to 13 August 1760 $$

$$ AH 1174 = 13 August 1760 to 2 August 1761 $$

$$ AH 1175 = 2 August 1761 to 22 July 1762 $$ **Appendix 2** ***RY/AD concordance for the period*** Alamgir II $$ 1 = 2 June 1754 to 14 May 1755 $$ $$ 2 = 14 May 1755 to 1 May 1756 $$ $$ 3 = 1 May 1756 to 20 April 1757 $$ $$ 4 = 20 April 1757 to 10 April 1758 $$ $$ 5 = 10 April 1758 to 31 March 1759 $$

6 = 31 March 1759 till 29 November 1759 (deposed and killed) Shahjahan III

1 = 29 November 1759 till 10 October 1760 (deposed by Bhau) Shah Alam II 1 = 10 October 1760 (Maratha reckoning)

1 = 29 November 1759 (Ruhela reckoning, later confirmed as the official reckoning)

Ahmed Shah Durrani (reckoned from the date of Nadir Shah's murder)

| Ry. | commences | AH | commences |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 10 Jumada II | Ahd | 19 June 1747 | 02-01-1747 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.2 | 07 June 1748 | 22-12-1747 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.3 | 28 May 1749 | 11-12-1748 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.4 | 17 May 1750 | 30-11-1749 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.5 | 06 May 1751 | 19-11-1750 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.6 | 25 April 1752 | 09-11-1751 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.7 | 14 April 1753 | 08-11-1752 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.8 | 04 April 1754 | 29-10-1753 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.9 | 24 March 1755 | 18-10-1754 | 10 Jumada II Ahd 19 June 1747 02-01-1747 10 Jumada II Ry.2 07 June 1748 22-12-1747 10 Jumada II Ry.3 28 May 1749 11-12-1748 10 Jumada II Ry.4 17 May 1750 30-11-1749 10 Jumada II Ry.5 06 May 1751 19-11-1750 10 Jumada II Ry.6 25 April 1752 09-11-1751 10 Jumada II Ry.7 14 April 1753 08-11-1752 10 Jumada II Ry.8 04 April 1754 29-10-1753 10 Jumada II Ry.9 24 March 1755 18-10-1754 10 Jumada II Ry.10 12 March 1756 07-10-1755

| 10 Jumada II | Ry.11 | 02 March 1757 | 26-09-1756 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.12 | 19 Feb. 1758 | 15-09-1757 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.13 | 08 Feb. 1759 | 04-09-1758 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.14 | 29 January 1760 | 25-08-1759 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.15 | 17 January 1761 | 13-08-1760 |
| 10 Jumada II | Ry.16 | 06 January 1762 | 02-08-1761 | 10 Jumada II Ry.12 19 Feb. 1758 15-09-1757 10 Jumada II Ry.13 08 Feb. 1759 04-09-1758 10 Jumada II Ry.14 29 January 1760 25-08-1759 10 Jumada II Ry.15 17 January 1761 13-08-1760 10 Jumada II Ry.16 06 January 1762 02-08-1761

**TIBETAN PATTERN COINS STRUCK FROM** **BRITISH DIES** ** **By Wolfgang Bertsch As part of the drive for modernisation, which was initiated in Tibet by the 13 th Dalai Lama after 1912, in 1913 four Tibetan boys were sent to England for higher education. One of them was** ** Rigzin Dorje Ringang ( *rig ´dzin rdo rje rin sgang* ), born in 1899 (Dhondup, 1984) 41. He studied electrical engineering at Northampton Polytechnic Institute in London (1916-1918) and left England in June 1920 after almost seven years of studies. For further prefessional training Ringang returned to England in January 1922. After training two years in various fields of electrical engineering at General Electric Company and in hydroelectric work with the firm of Arms Whiteworth and Co. Ltd, he purchased hydro-electrical machinery for the government of Tibet and returned to his country in September 1924 (Dhondup, 1984, p. 53-56). The machinery had arrived in Kalimpong already by the end of October 1924, but it took until the end of 1926 until all parts had reached Lhasa. Ringang could at long last start in July 1927 to set up the hydro-electric power plant at Dode ( *dog bde* ) near the already existing mint. 42 The Dode plant supplied the electric power for the mint and arsenal at Trabshi Lekhung 43. This power was crucial for working modern imported machinery for printing paper money and minting coins after this mint was modernised and officially reopened in 1932. Most probably the Tibetan government had contacted the English manufacturer of modern coin presses, Taylor & Challen of Birmingham, in about 1923, either directly or with the help of Ringang in order to purchase and import modern minting equipment. This date is suggested by two of the pattern coins which bear the date 15-57 (1923). The British Company or one of its suppliers must have prepared several coin dies intended for striking Tibetan coins of various denominations in order to show the Tibetan mint officials what kind of coins could be produced with modern coin presses. One pair of master punches and a pair of dies and several patterns struck from other British dies have survived and are illustrated below. The date 161 on one of the patterns allows us to speculate that, in this year (1927), further coin presses may have been imported from England, although I am not aware of any other evidence to support this assumption. None of the British coin dies were used by the Tibetans to strike coins for circulation, but their style and finish had a considerable impact on the quality and design of coin dies which were manufactured in Tibet between 1928 and 1953. In 1928, Tibetan patterns of fine style of two denominations (5 Sho and 10 tam; see figs. 13 and 13a) were produced in the Dode mint or in Tabshi 41 A joint website by the Pitt Rivers Museum and the British Museum gives 1901 as Ringang's year of birth. <http://tibet.prm.ox.ac.uk/biography\_23.html> 42 Dode was located about 15 km northeast of Lhasa in the valley of the same name. I have recorded three different ways of spelling the toponym Dode in Tibetan: *dog bde; dog sde; rdo sde.* 43 The full name of this mint whch was located about 3 kilometers north of Lhasa is *grwa bzhi glog ´phrul (* or *´khrul) las khungs* "Trabshi Electrical Machine Factory". --- ---
*Fig. 17 * *Minting machinery from Tabshi Lekhung according to Zhu Jinzhong et* *al., 2002.* * *

** ** *Fig, 18* *Copper medal of 1912. Obverse legend: " MINTING MACHINERY* *FOR THE WORLD'S COINAGE, TAYLOR & CHALLEN LD* *ENGINEERS BIRMINGHAM ENGLAND 1912"  The reverse features* *a coin press and other coining machinery from Taylor & Challen Ld.* *Diameter: 38 mm* *Baldwin's Auctions Ltd: Auction no. 49, Hongkong, 26.08.2010, Lot* ** **

*Fig. 19 * *The now defunct firm of Taylor & Challen Ltd in Birmingham,* *photographed by Ian Bower in 2007* *Source: flicker-photosharing* ** ** *Bibliography*

Album, Stephen: *Coin List,* no.54, Santa Rosa, Calif., February 1988, coin no. 1050.  Baldwin´s Auctions Ltd, Ma Tak Wo Numismatic Co. Ltd, Monetarium (S) Pte Ltd and Ronald G. Gillio Auctions: *Hong Kong Coin Auction*, Catalogue 40, Hong Kong, 1 September 2005. Bertsch, Wolfgang: "A Pattern Struck in England for Tibet". *Numismatics* *International Bulletin,* vol. 21, no. 2, February 1987, pp. 33-35. Bertsch, Wolfgang: "The 20 th century Pattern Coinage of Tibet". *Numismatics* *International Bulletin,* vol. 32, no. 1, January 1997, p. 7-18. Brilliant, Lawrence B. and Brilliant, Girija E.: *Himalayan Numismatics.* Chelsea, Michigan, Spring 1983. Cao Gang: *Zhong guo xi zang di feng huo bi (Chinese Tibet´s Regional* *Currency),* Sichuan Minzi Chubanshe (Sichuan Nationalities Publishing

House), Chengdu, 1999. ISBN7-5409-2203-6/C.37 Dhondup, K.: "The Thirteenth Dalai Lama´s Experiment in Modern Education". *The Tibet Journal,* vol. 9, no. 3, Dharamsala, Autumn, 1984, p. 38-58. Gabrisch, Karl \[Textredaktion: Peter Lindegger; Hans-Markus von Kaenel\]: *Geld aus Tibet,* Sammlung Dr. Karl Gabrisch; Ausstellung des Münzkabinetts der Stadt Winterthur 27. September 1989 bis 12. August 1990 / Stadt Winterthur, Departement für Kulturelles & Tibet-Institut Rikon. Winterthur und Rikon 1990. Lepczyck, Joseph: Auction no. 59, Philadephia, 12-13 October 1984, lot 767. Pitt Rivers Museum, the British Museum: *The Tibet Album. Britsh photography* *in Central Tibet 1920 - 1959.* * * <http://tibet.> prm.ox.ac.uk/biography\_23.html Rhodes, Nicholas: "Two Tibetan Pattern Coins". *Oriental Numismatic Society,* *Newsletter,* no. 105, March-April, 1987. SCOWC= Krause, Chester L. and Mishler, Clifford (senior editor: Colin R. Bruce II): *1999 Standard Catalog of World Coins,* Iola, Wisconsin, 1999. Tibetan pattern coins are listed and illustrated on p. 1668 and 1669. In later editions of this standard reference, the illustrations of the Tibetan pattern coins were eliminated. Valdettaro, Carlo: *Tibetan Coins in the Collection of CVR. (Draft for III Ed.)*, Breganzona, 1974 (unpublished). Xiao Huaiyuan: *Xizang difang huobi shi* (The History of Tibetan Money), Beijing, 1987. Yin Zheng Min: *Zhong guo xi zang qian bi tu lu (Illustrated Catalogue of the* *Money of China´s Tibet),* Xizang Renmin Chubanshe (Tibet People´s Publishing House), Lhasa 2004, ISBN 7-223-01686-8 Zhu Jinzhong, Wang Hai Yan, Wang Jia Feng, Zhang Wu Yi, Wu Han Lin, Wang Dui and Tse ring Pin cuo: *Zhong guo Xi zang Qian bi (Chinese Tibet´s* *Money).* Xi zang zi zhi ou qian bi xue hui (Tibet Autonomous Region Numismatic Society). Zhong hua shu ju, ISBN 7-101-03360-4/Z.449, Beijing, 2002.

Note: My thanks go to the late Nicholas G. Rhodes for making many valuable suggestions and providing additional information and illustrations for this article. * * **PALEMBANG PICIS INSCRIBED "ALAMAT** **SULTAN"** By Dr T. Yih, ***Introduction*** The subject of this short paper is a series of small cash pieces (picis) inscribed "Alamat sultan", attributed to the city of Palembang on the Indonesian island of Sumatra. A preliminary typology will be presented and their historical context will be discussed. It is based on about  107 pieces from the author's collection In addition to the black-white drawings in this paper, the reader is referred to the Zeno database (<https://www.ZENO.ru)> for images of the coins by ZN-numbers within brackets. ***Historical background*** The city of Palembang situated on the northeastern coast of the island of Sumatra near the estuary of the Musi river has been an important trade centre in the past. Around AD 1659 the sultanate of Palembang was established after a period of anarchy and war amongst contestants for power. It maintained its independence until 1821, when the sultan,  Mahmud Baharuddin II, was deported to Ternate by the Dutch. Thereafter, puppet sultans were installed under Dutch supervision. A list of the Palembang sultans is available on the Zeno database. There has always been a large Chinese minority that was not only involved in trade, but also in monetary affairs, e.g.  the production of picis was the exclusive right of the sultan, who, in turn, often had it farmed out to Chinese. ***Numismatic background*** Palembang picis are described in the main numismatic literature dealing with the coins of the former Dutch East Indies. Millies 52 states that the earliest date found on Palembang coins is AH 1103/

52 H.C. Millies, *Recherches sur les monnaies des indigènes de l'archipel* *Indien et de la péninsule Malaie*, La Haye, 1871.
**Metallic composition** The metallic composition as revealed by XRF-analysis of two main type I specimens is about 74% tin and 23% lead **DISCUSSION** **Historical context and dating** The eldest known Palembang pieces are a small picis with the date

AH 1103 ( AD 1691/92) and some pieces dated AH 1113 ( AD 1701/02). According to Millies, the oldest Palembang picis  had no central hole and only from AH 1198 ( AD 1783/84) did the sultans of Palembang issue round or octagonal picis with a round central hole. This is in contrast with his own illustration (M184) of a holed Palembang piece with date AH 1163/ AD 1749. Such a piece is now available in the Zeno database (ZN96455 and ZN104679). In view of its weight (1.49 g) one might wonder whether it should be considered a picis. Rademacher, however, in his description of the island of Sumatra in 1779, mentions the circulation of small lead picis with a square hole. As far as is known, the only Palembang picis with a square central hole are those with the legend " *alamat* *sul* ṭā *n* ". Although type I is apparently much more common than type II, the frequency ratio type I versus type II being about 3 (76% versus 24%), it is remarkable that type II has not been mentioned in the literature. Another unsolved item is the question why type II appeared and whether it might represent a higher value. Table 1 shows that although type II is larger in diameter than type I, because of its larger central hole the weights of both types are more or less comparable.

With respect to the error types, the following can be said. Millies illustrated some aberrant coins under nos 208 and 209. Error type 1 in which the legend is written clockwise is comparable to Millies no. 208. The legend of Millies no. 209 is very similar to our round-hole no. 14 because of the way that " *sul* ṭā " is engraved upside down. It differs, however, with respect to the interchanged positions of the " *n* "and " *mt* ".   Error type-2 has not been previously described. As mentioned above in the general description, nearly 50% of the pieces have the remnants of a single casting channel still visible. This protrusion is not randomly positioned around the coin, but is restricted to defined places. There is apparently a difference between the two main types. For main type I the protrusion is located as follows: 26 pieces (72%) at the " *n* " and 10 pieces (28%) at " *mt* ". For main type II the numbers are: 4 pieces (31%) at " *n* "; 3 pieces (23%) at " *mt* " and 6 pieces (46%) at " *ala* ". Unfortunately, up till now, no moulds for these picis have been discovered. The position of the protrusions at the " *n"* and " *mt* " means that some coins have the protrusion at the left side and others at the right side. This suggests that they were cast using a mould with side channels left and right to a central channel resulting in a money-tree as is known from Malaysian sultanates such as Kelantan or with a wooden mould as shown by Netscher/vd Chijs in their plate XXXII. In conclusion, this short paper gives an update of the data of Millies and Netscher/vd Chijs from more than a century ago and the author hopes that it will be a stimulus to describe the picis  of the Palembang sultanate based on the numerous new discoveries and offerings on the market. ***Table 2  Individual metrical data***

**No** **Wt** **(g)** **Diameter** **(mm)** **Thickness** **(mm)** # **(mm)** **Remarks** **Main type I**

0.61 18.1 0.7 7.1 **ZN46675** 0.88 18.3-20.5 0.8 6.3-7.0 0.61 18.2 0.6 6.4 0.49 18.1 0.6 7.2 0.41 18.0 0.5 7.4 0.47 18.1 0.5 6.1-7.2 0.60 17.8 0.5 6.1-6.8 0.54 18.3 0.6 6.7 0.55 17.6 0.6 7.2 0.77 17.0 1.1 6.6 **error type-2** **ZN104654** 0.47 17.3 0.6 6.0-7.3 **error type-1** **ZN104656** 0.57 16.9 0.5 7.0 **ZN104651** 0.48 18.1 0.5 6.7 0.62 17.4 0.6 5.8 ** **0.36 16.2 0.5 6.0-6.7 0.53 18.1 0.5 7.5 1.02 18.2 1.2 6.4-6.8 two pieces stuck together 0.41 16.0 0.7 6.4 0.38 16.5 0.5 6.3-6.9 0.50 17.7 0.6 6.6 0.37 16.0 0.7 6.7**error type-2 ** **ZN104652** 0.61 18.0 0.6 6.3 0.44 16.8 0.6 5.5 0.44 16.5 0.5 6.3 0.61 18.3 0.7 5.1-7.4 0.54 18.0 0.6 7.4 0.53 18.1 0.7 6.8-7.9 0.52 18.4 0.7 7.0

0.50 16.7 0.6 6.8 0.64 18.2 0.7 6.1-6.8 0.63 18.2 0.6 6.5-7.3 0.42 17.3 0.6 6.9 **error type-1** **ZN104655** 0.59 18.3 0.6 6.6-7.0 0.54 18.3 0.5 6.7-7.5 0.64 18.3 0.7 6.3-7.1 0.47 16.5 0.7 6.2 **Error type-2** **ZN104653** 0.73 18.2 0.7 6.3-7.1 0.43 16.2 0.5 6.5 0.43 18.2 0.5 6.1-7.3 0.52 17.2 0.7 7.1-7.5 0.61 17.1 0.7 6.8 0.71 18.6 0.6 6.8 0.67 18.3 0.6 6.3-6.6 0.59 18.3 0.6 6.2-7.0 0.63 18.2 0.7 6.3-6.7 0.52 17.5 0.6 6.5 0.56 18.1 0.6 6.9-7.6 0.48 17.8-18.5 0.5 6.6-6.9 0.50 18.3 0.5 6.5 0.52 18.2 0.6 6.5-7.0 0.60 18.5 0.6 5.6-7.0 0.56 18.0-18.3 0.6 6.3-7.0 0.65 18.3 0.6 6.4-6.9 0.55 18.5 0.5 6.5-7.0 0.69 18.5 0.7 6.3 0.53 18.0 0.6 6.8 0.76 18.2 0.7 6.4 0.57 18.5 0.6 6.8 0.47 16.9 0.5 6.9 0.52 18.0 0.5 6.8-7.8 0.59 18.2 0.6 6.4-6.9 0.44 16.5 0.6 6.7 0.63 16.1 0.7 5.8-6.0 0.34 17.2 0.5 6.7 0.45 16.2 0.6 6.4-6.9
0.53 16.9 0.6 6. 0.55 18.2 0.6 6. 0.51 16.8 0.6 6. 0.62 18.1 0.6 6. 0.52 17.8 0.6 6. 0.48 18.3 0.5 6. 0.45 17.2 0.8 6.20.51 18.1 0.6 6.60.53 18.3 0.5 6. 0.58 18.4 0.5 6.40.49 18.1 0.6 6.00.64 17.3 0.7 5.7-

0.50 17.2 0.5 6.20.40 16.7 0.5 6.60.35 17.1 0.5 6. 0.38 16.9 0.5 6. **Main type II**

0.65 19.9 0.6 9. 0.61 19.2 0.6 8. 0.64 19.5 0.9 8. 0.72 20.1 0.8 8. 0.58 19.8 0.6

0.59 19.5 0.6 9. 0.59 19.3 0.7 9. 0.68 19.6 0.6 8.21.14 19.8 1.1 8. 0.60 19.8 0.7 8. 0.60 19.8 0.7 9. **Third Seminar on Early Iranian** *Fig. 1. Survivors of the Hofs*.8.8.7.7.4.5 -6.7 -6.8.7 **ZN104644** -6.6 -7.1 -6.0 **circle** **ZN104657** -7.0 -7.0.8.7.0.6.2.6 0.1 **error type-1** **ZN104660**.4.2 -9.1.4 **error type-2** **ZN104662**.5 **error type-2** **ZN104659**.2 0.60 19.9 0. 0.53 19.6 0. 0.57 19.5 0.

0.63 19.4 0. 0.47 19.3 0. 0.57 19.6 0. 0.69 19.4 0.7 0.55 19.6 0. 0.72 19.8 0.7 0.71 20.1 0. 0.63 19.4 0. 0.64 19.4 0.7 0.60 19.8 0. 0.91 19.4 0.94 19.7 0.

**Late News - New Publication** ***Anatolian Early 14*** ***th*** ***Century C*** Timothy May and Vlastimil No Museum, Prague, 2011. Format: black and white illustrations. ISBN

This book comprised the res group of 405 dirhams struck in A the 14 th century AD. It includes Mahmud and the Seljuq rulers, K and Mas'ud II, and some imitation in 2006, having been in priva unspecified locality in Ukraine o alleged place of discovery.

**n and Central Asian Numismatics in Memoriam Boris Ko**

*stra seminar: speakers and remaining guests in the lecture ha*

8.8 9.1 **ZN99254** 9.3 **error type-3** **ZN104663** 9.0 9.3 9.4 9.2 8.9 8.8 8.7 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.4 8.7 **ZN104658**

***Coin Hoard*** by Judith Kolbas, ovák, published by the National

A4, soft covers, pp. 111 with N 978-80-7036-305-8 sults of the detailed study of a natolian mints around the turn of
coins of the Ilkhanid, Ghazan Kay Khusraw III, Kay Qubad III
ns. The hoard appeared in Prague ate hands since the 1960s. An or Romania was reported as the **ochnev (1940-2002)** *all by 6:30 pm*
# 

** ** ** ** **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 209** ** ** Page

ONS news - obituary Mark Blackburn, by S. Bhandare - obituary Shams Eshragh, by Y. Jaffar ONS meeting Utrecht 2011 ONS meeting New York 2012 New members New and recent publications 4, 35 Auction news

Third seminar on early Iranian and Central Asian numismatics in memoriam Boris Kochnev, ed. M Bates, contributions by K. Kravtsov, L. Treadwell & A. Naymark, W. Ziad, D. Varisco, S. Heidemann, N. Akkaya, O. Kirillova. 5, 35 Numismatic research at the British Museum

Book review: Arabic and Persian seals and amulets in the British Museum (V. Porter), reviewed by M. Mitchener

A lead tessera and its potential  importance for understanding the reverse image of 'Abd al-Malik's "standing caliph" coins, by N. Schindel

A brief note on a "skinny" standing caliph Arab-Byzantine coin, presumably from Amman, by T. Ramadan

A second Mu ḥ ammadiyya, and the four mints of the B ā junays mine, by M. Bates

The coinage of Taq ī Kh ā n Durr ā n ī, rebel in Kirm ā n, by A. Akopyan & F. Mosanef

TheMarathas in Delhi in the 'Panipat' year: a numismatic insight, by S. Bhandare

Tibetan pattern coins struck from British dies, by W. Bertsch

Palembang picis inscribed "Alamat Sultan", by Dr T. Yih

## ***Officers of the Society***

*Printed by Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, UK.     *