# rr nin a \|

# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY Secretary General U.K. & Eire: Mr. P. Smith,

# Nicholas Rhodes, ees UK coy - gure و‎ - Peel ny -- #تة‎ America: Mr. C. Karukstis

Newsletter Editor: Mr. S. Goron, e-mail: urrey, e-mail: ueyonder.co.uk South Asia: Farokh Todywalla, Regional Secretaries: b: NEWSLETTER General: Mr. R. Senior, a astonbury, U.K. Pakistan Chapter: Mr. S. M. Mirza, Europe: Mr. J. Lingen, slamabad, Pakistan. etherlands. Annual Subscription: No177~mail:WXS.1l£15,€25,$30. e Autumn 2003 information about this and future meetings please contact

Nikolaus Ganske, E-mail: 272222555255913 ONS News

ONS A The reminder site Website contains that a the full ONS index Website of newsletter can contents be found which at <http://www.onsnumis.org.> members may find useful.

Congratulations Members News to Dr Hans Wilski on being made a Life Member of the Hellenic Numismatic Society in recognition of his work in the field of Greek Numismatics. Dr Wilski's important book Countermarks on Ottoman Coins was published in 1995 and his New Table of Countermarks was published more recently and reviewed in Newsletter 174.

Request Susan Tyler-Smith for information is working on a group of about 600 Sasanian coins, the latest of which is dated year 12 or 13 of Khusrau II, at present on loan to the Friedrich-Schiller University in Jena. They are part of the so-called "Year 12' or 'Shiraz' hoard which first appeared on the European market in the early 1970s. She is trying to gather as much information as possible about the hoard and has consulted the published reports of Seaby, Warden, Ilisch and Sears but would like to hear from anyone who has personal recollections of the hoard and/or may have bought part of it. Another 47 coins probably from the same hoard were reported, with a brief description, by Lowick (Coin Hoards 2, p. 95-6, no. 357). These coins were then in private hands but a full listing was made and filed at the British Museum. Unfortunately she has not yet been able to locate this list so would be very pleased to hear from the present owner of the parcel. The Jena parcel is by far the largest part of this important hoard which has been made available for study. Susan hopes to publish a detailed, well-illustrated catalogue of it along with a discussion of the problems thrown up by the hoard.

Please contact her ند‎ eres ©" RGieretete ALOACEAE \|

Cologne The next meeting of the Indian Coin Group is due to take place on 8 November 2003 at the Rémisch-Germanische-Museum. For
New Kh & and A Mousheghian, Recent Publications C Bresc, G Depeyrot, F Gurnet: History and coin finds in Armenia - Inventory of coins and hoards (7-19" century), II, 2003, 136.م‎ 8 pl. Published by Moneta, و2‎ بوجوو ووو \\Vcticren, Belgium. Fax: ++32 93 69 59

25; <https://www.cultura-net.com/moneta.> Price: €50.

Landon Thomas: "A rare Sultani of Sultan Murad IV" in Spink Numismatic Circular, Vol. CX1, No. 4, August 2003, London.

- General 2. 3. 4. 5. 1. P. The The Trends, A The Singh: Fresh bibliography Emergence, Sixteen Post-Vedic Patterns Republics, Literary Mahajanapadas Growth and of Republics: Discovery Kingdoms, Urbanisation, index. & Decay The of of A Northern the Towns book Critical of the Seals Urban is Growth & available India Assessment of Cities Centres Dvaraka & in in the Decline from in Ancient Age North- of in Raju the the of of India, Bhatt Functioning the Towns West Epic 2003, (<https://www.coinbooks.esmartweb.com)> Buddha Age: India & New Cities A in of Delhi, Supplement the Republics; in Pre- hard-bound, Ancient & to General Post-Mauryan Archaeological India 336 Causes from and pages. the Period presumably of Discovery Post-Harappan the as Decline Gleaned by other & S. This sources. new Disappearance Period R. from Rao. Price work the to Classical not the has stated. Gupta the of Republics following Sources. Age with five Special sections: Reference to the Ganga Valley.

Work Michael in Mitchiner Progress is well advanced on his new magnum opus to be entitled Ancient Trade and Early Coinage. The coverage of this work will extend from Britain to Japan! More later. Lists Received

2. 1. Scott Stephen E. Cordry Album (PO (PO Box Box 9828, 7386, San Santa Diego, Rosa, CA Calif. 92169, 95407, USA: tel USA; ++1 tel 858 ++1 272 707 9440; 539 fax 2120; ++1 fax 858 ++1 272 707 9441) 539 list 3348: 127 album@sonic.net) lists 191 (August 2003), 192 (October 2003)

# N

# FE

(September 2003) of modern Islamic coins and rare Islamic banknotes.

Auction Auction Brussels, For Fax: Auction Dmitry all Morton +44 enquiries News 76 Frankfurt (0)20 Markov 376 & Belgium; of 7495 Eden's of about Jean am Dr Coins 6325 this Busso Elsen Main, next & tel or auction Medals future Germany; Peus steve@mortonandeden.com s.a. +432 Nachf. sales, of (PO Coins tel please Box 2 ++49 and 950, contact: 734 69 Banknotes New 959 6356; York, 6620; will numismatique@elsen.be; NY fax be Stephen held ++49 10272, on Lloyd, 69 USA; 11 December, 55 Morton tel 59 ++1 95; & <https://www.elsen.be)> 718 and Eden info@peus-muenzen.de; 332 includes Ltd, 4248; 2215107 almost fax held ++1 on 200 718 13 lots <https://www.peus-> September 332 of 8676; Islamic 2003 markov@banet.net; coins. muenzen.de London had Among 229204259258387! around ) held the 150 Umayyad <https://www.russian-coins.net)> on el: lots +44 29/30 of oriental (0)20 material, October 7493 interest. highlights 5344 had recently some include 450 held lots a unique mail of bid oriental dirhams auction interest of that Dashtaq including included 94h a some fine and collection 140 "Naysabur" lots of of Parthian central 82h (each Asian coins. is and the various specimen Islamic illustrated coins. by Klat), as well as other rare dirhams from Arran and Zaranj and a Revolutionary Period dirham of Hamadhan 129h. There is an extensive selection of Abbasid coins, ranging from large lots of commoner dirhams through interesting Cilician cast fulus to such rarities as an unpublished dirham of San'a, struck on a broad flan and dated 280h, a doubleweight dinar of al-Ahwaz 322h and rare late dinars from the mint of Irbil. Fatimid coins include a dinar of Dimashq 446h and an extremely rare issue of the partisan al-Basasiri struck at Madinat al-Salam in 451h. An extremely rare square-in-circle dinar of the Rum Seljuq Kaykhusraw III, struck at Madinat Siwas in 668h is estimated at £3,000-4,000, while a dinar struck by the Zanj rebels at Madinat al-Mukhtara in 2615 is expected to reach £4,0006.000.

Other News 7Zhoushan The The Yingzhou from News first Numismatic Zhoushan second is is the Yingzhou is old Numismatic Society name Yingzhou quantan for is one Zhoushan, Society, qianbi of \[Coins the China most an wenji of important active Yingzhou\] \[Yingzhou regional port in a collection eastern numismatic numismatics: Zhejiang of societies a collection papers province. in China. presented of articles\]. The It was editor-in-chief at founded It numismatic is the proceedings on the is conferences 20 Mr January Sheng of the organised Guanxi, Society's 1987. for an conference by a extremely while the Society had held active its since in member 2002. own 1998. journal of It the is Zhoushan arranged society. in Qianbi four parts, and continues with each to part produce containing a newsletter the proceedings Zhoushan of Qianbi the conferences: Tongxun. (1) To celebrate on the numismatist, its fifteenth Fang anniversary, Ruo (1869-1954); the Society (2) has on published forgeries two and new coin books. authentication; (3) on coin-finds from Zhoushan; and (4) on world coins.

## SHENG Guanxi (ed.), Yingzhou gianbi wenji, Helen Zhoushan: Wang

7houshan Qianbi Xuehui, 2003. (334 pp.) \[ISBN 7-105-01520-3\] SHENG Guanxi (ed.), Yingzhou quantan. Zhoushan: Zhoushan Qianbi Xuehui, 2001. (545 pp.) \[ISBN 7-5205-3928-2\]
The In 1992, Seventh Since The The group a next then, group Century meeting as symposia a of whole collectors Syrian will has have Numismatic be no of been held secretariat early held in Islamic Oxford Round at and the is coinage British Table on quite 29 informal. Museum and and the 30 related November in If you December would Byzantine 1993 1996, like and to series April hosted be placed got 1998, by together James on March the Howard-Johnson mailing to 2000, pool and list their October please knowledge and contact 2001. Luke about However, Treadwell. one of the the the enigmatic following: For ninth more symposium Umayyad information Marcus Phillips in coins November about of and this the Susan meeting 2002 pre-reform was Tyler-Smith please held period. at email the at They University Luke decided Treadwell of to Birmingham at organise \[RRR a symposium and hosted oriental-institute.oxford.ac.uk on by the John subject Haldon under and the auspices The Eurydiké meetings of Georgiantelis the are Oriental open to and Numismatic all subtitled those with Society, 'Coinage a genuine and and the History interest first meeting in in the the at 7" numismatics, which century informal Near history East'. papers and This were archaeology recognised given took of what the place Middle had in been the East. Department happening of for Coins some and years Medals - a widening in the British of the Museum subject matter in April to of include that year. the About archaeology twenty and people history attended, of 'Syria' and in the the 'core' seventh group century was motivated AD, and to a widening organise of a the follow-up geographical meeting boundaries in July to include 1993. Egypt The and third N symposium Africa on the was one held hand in and November Iran and Iraq 1994, on and the by other. the time of the fourth in December 1995 there had been a declaration of independence from the ONS and The Seventh Century Syrian Numismatic Round Table was 'born'.

## Hees © freenet.co.uk Tony Goodwin Andrew Oddy at

Hees Corrigendum 2 btopenworld.com or Andrew Oddy at Beez )nt!world.com

In the article "Gold-fragments of the 11th century found in the citadel of Damascus" by Stefan Heidemann published in Newsletter 175, the Byzantine gold-fragment is of Romanos III Dukas (1028-1034 AbD) and not of Constantine X (1059-1067 AD) as stated.

Bombay Billys - a rejoinder by Hans Herrli to the articles that appeared in the Supplement to ONS Newsletter 172 and additions in ONS 174 and 176

Between I Based 1. 2. do they they not 1990 on all wish contained and my contained, to 1995 experience enter at I had into in least different the a and long 1 opportunity "British" my controversy proportions, notes fanam to I believe look here a of at mixture but 3 the that restrict hoards type the of silver showing paper myself of Malabar fanams in to an ONS a 8 few fanams instead of 172 remarks: the comes 'Ali in of India. the Rajas, to 5. far-reaching A the hoard French of conclusions and around of the 300 British that pieces are type not in and entirely Cochin supported and another by the one rather of about small the material same base. size in Bombay \| studied only superficially, but I took notes of the weights of the more interesting coins. In 1995 I studied in Bombay a very large hoard of around 1500 coins. Of this hoard I bought some of the most interesting specimens and published them in an illustrated paper'. (Hans Herrli: "1/5 Rupees or silver Fanams of the Malabar Coast" in: Oriental Numismatic Studies, edited by Devendra Handa, New Delhi 1996). The 3 hoards had 2 common characteristics: French Fanons:

2. 3. \|. It According There is not true are to that the no there French Mahé are sources no fanons Mahé the fanons fanons bearing dated of the Mahé between mintname were 1738 not and locally PUDUCHERY. 1750. struck, Fanons but This produced of 1743, name at occurs 1744 Pondichéry. and only 1749 on are copper known coins to me. and (A in fanon Tamil of script. 1744 The is illustrated Mahé coins in my show above-mentioned the mintname PURCHERY paper. Photo or # as 15.) the The French striking sources of these have French it: Pourchéry. 1/5 rupee pieces did not mainly depend on the events taking place on the Malabar Coast, but on what happened at Pondichéry. British-type Fanams:

2. \|. Up lype to 6 now of the I have Bhandare seen 5 / specimens Stevens paper of the is fanam not a fanam type with showing the 8 an and inverted \| have noted 5, but their the very weight. rare type All of showing the coins an were inverted intermingled 3. Such a coin with is other illustrated fanam in types my and paper all (photo of them # 29). weighed between 2.23 and 2.26 g. (One piece weighing 2.23 g is illustrated in my paper.) I therefore do not believe that these coins were design trials or patterns, but a circulating, albeit rare type. We certainly have to find another and more plausible explanation for the occurence of fanams with an 8 or an inverted 3.

\| In this paper I unfortunately repeated Pridmore's error about the Malayalam 5 without checking the forms of the Malayalam numbers; it is of course an inverted English 5.

To which We would Drs Stevens like to and thank Bhandare Hans reply Herrli as for follows: his very helpful points. Unfortunately we were not aware of his paper until some time after the publication of ours in the ONS and therefore failed to include his observations in our analysis. His comments seem very pertinent, and we have made the following comments.

Hoards These of Billys two points and Fanons are very interesting, although they do not make a substantive difference to our dating sequence (the major output of our analysis). We would accept that the Billys do appear to have been coined through the 1730s and 1740s at various times and that there was not a significant gap in their production as we originally concluded. This is based on further archival research that we have undertaken since the initial publication of our paper'\*\*\*. We supported our original conclusion with the observation that the French also ceased production of their fanons at that time, and Herrli's information is very helpful in confirming that both the French and the British did produce coins for use in their settlements on the Malabar Coast at that time.

١١ Letters from Tellicherry, vols. 1-4, 1729-1736" vol. 1, pp.24, 29 (printed by the Superintendent, Government Press, Madras, 1934): February 19th 1730, °... The treasure Yo Hon. &c have been pleas'd to assign us ammog to 60000 rupees, 5981 of which being fanams or fifths..." June 5th 1730, \*....The fifth rupees you promised to send us after the rains will be absolutely necessary...... 2. Letters from Tellicherry, vols. 1-4, 1729-1736" vol. 2, p57 (printed by the Superintendent, Government Press, Madras, 1934): May 29th 1733, '....introduction of our fifths...' 3. Letters from Tellicherry, 1729-1736 vol. III, p63. Government Press, Madras, 1934. Letter from Tellicherry to Anjengo dated November 9th 1734. \*....PS. The Honble Presidt & Col are pleased to advise us of their having directed you to send hither ten thousand rupees and a quantity of fanams as the latter cannot be put off with you but for loss; if they are fifths of rupees they will be very acceptable but if
4. Letters fanams to Tellicherry \[presumably 1738-39, tiny gold vol. fanams\] III, p4. it Government will be entirely Press, out Madras, of our power 1934. Letter to disburse from them' Bombay to Tellicherry dated 30 November 1738 "We now send you one hundred thousand \[rupees\] including therein the fifths you desired, which are of the usual value of two and a half per cent worse then our rupee silver. Had these been made better than what hitherto sent you we judged they would have brought the others into disesteem, however if you desire a farther supply equal in value to the rupees (except the difference of coinage which will not be more then half per cent) they shall be sent you of that fineness."

Spelling Again, of Puduchery/Purchery/Pourchery this is not of great significance to our dating sequence. The reading of the word can go either way as two characters in the inscription - the 'r' and the 'd' - look so much the same that they are freely interchangeable. However, if French sources have it as Pourchery, then we are happy to live with Purchery. We note that Herrli chooses 'Purcheri' in his paper although he refers to 'puddu cheri' in reference 6 of the same paper.

British We type are fanams: less inclined inverted to 5 v accept inverted the 3 notion that this is an inverted 3, although we must admit the possibility. The picture in Herrli's paper could be of an inverted 3 with the cross bar missing, or an inverted 5 with the cross-bar missing. Without seeing the actual coin, we cannot be sure. The few specimens that we examined did not show the complete numeral.

Fanam type with the 8 This is a very interesting finding and we fully support his conclusions. The reason for the 8 (and possibly the 3) could, we

think, only be accounted for by the fact that the relative value of

these coins fluctuated and that for a short time they passed as "ا‎ rupee despite being the same weight as existing one-fifths, and were marked as such. It is difficult to believe that they could ever have passed as one-third rupee. Articles

The Two-Caliph Bronze of 'Abd Al-Malik By Clive Foss

A novel type of the bronze coinage of Abd al-Malik (6850-705) was discovered in the excavations of Gerasa/Jerash and first published by John Walker in 1935.' The dig found two examples, both struck from the same dies. Since then, three other specimens have come to light, all struck from the same pair of dies.? These are large, heavy coins, weighing from 6-11 g and with an average diameter of 26mm.' They bear a unique obverse type, best described in the most recent publication:\*

"Two figures standing, facing, wearing long robes and oriental head-dress; their r. hands are placed on their swords in an attitude prescribed for the Imam at the recitation of the public sermon (khutba); the bands of their girdles hang down, on \|.; on the top of their head-dresses, six-pointed stars; between them, on three steps, a sharp, pointed, tall standard with globe."

The obverse is uninscribed. The reverse bears a large M, with sixpointed star above and A below, with the inscription bism illah 'abd allah 'abd al-malik amir al-mu'minin. It has no mintmark.

The inscription The The This When It seems obverse present succession the to leaves caliph me type, type that was no has therefore, Yazid this doubt of not extraordinary great ibn that attracted stands importance, Mu'awiya this is apart much an type official (of since in could attention. that the issue it be Umayyad it excluded brought clearly It of has the Umayyad been portrays valid family) into association taken claimants died two caliph; (e.g., in caliphs. November and by with its Qedar consolidated size these Since and and 683, events. there weight Goodwin) succession power was Strictly inevitably no in as to time the maintaining speaking, supreme Marwanid associate in the power of Umayyad the course, it branch local with was the tradition period open of there the region to was - Umayyad the let of of never alone strongest Scythopolis, Scythopolis, in family. a joint the claimant. reign To where rule where of effect of 'Abd Yazid's this the two it, aberrant al-Malik twin he caliphs, young summoned figures heavy - son but when of standard Mu'awiya there two the the shared Syrian was sixth- was II a century in the had leaders consistent caliphal virtually to Byzantine his power, use no headquarters authority through rulers it is the natural and in Justin 'Arab-Byzantine' Damascus, died to and in assume any Sophia and case that obliged period. after continued the a type them few months. had to to take no be featured special the The oath candidate of on meaning, allegiance the with Arab-Byzantine only the to both most continuing his widespread coinage, sons, appointing a evidently support local the tradition. was because two 'Abdallah of coins them Yet of consideration as ibn those his al-Zubayr, heirs. rulers 'Abd of who had the al-Malik seen was historical recognised extensive was to circumstances circulation succeed in Arabia, Marwan, there. the may East Nor then, suggest and was on most the his an appearance alternative of death, Syria. the The approach supreme of Umayyad two figures and power family, interpretation. at would all however, unusual pass to rallied on 'Abd this behind coinage. al-'Aziz. Marwan Most The commonly, sources ibn al-Hakam, make two it Mu'awiya's standing clear that figures allegiance second were cousin, was the to regular proclaiming be sworn obverse to him both type caliph the of Baalbek. at sons Jabiya together.° One in southern rare On this variety Syria occasion, in of June that then, 684. mint two To portrays secure future two the caliphs loyalty standing were of figures his named supporters, holding and guaranteed he orbs announced with the crosses, power that Yazid's and to which with son a the long Khalid elder, cross and 'Abd on his steps own albetween nephew Malik, easily Amr them, succeeded ibn in a Sa'id configuration would on the succeed death reminiscent of him their in of father. the the caliphate present He reigned type. (he Another, was alone, already in even his over own rarer, 60). name, has With two and that standing sent backing, 'Abd figures he al-'Aziz proceeded with off عغطا‎ to to win Egypt, the between. battle which of he Marj The governed Rahit, exceedingly which successfully gave rare him coinage for supremacy twenty of years. Amman in Syria During had and soon two that figures, whole in all the time, one western seated however, territories and one 'Abd standing. of al-'Aziz the caliphate. The was coins recognised Now of that Scythopolis he as was the and caliph's secure Gerasa, in successor, power, closest Marwan in despite module reneged "Abd to the al-Malik's on present his agreement coins, increasing portrayed with desire Khalid two to enthroned and escape Amr, an opting figures.\* agreement instead Almost which to ensure all would of the these deprive succession are his 'imperial' own for his sons images two of sons the that succession. "Abd is, al-Malik they Fortunately were and modeled 'Abd for al-'Aziz. them, on the 'Abd He Byzantine did al-\*Aziz this iconography, in died the before year 65, his as shown which brother, began by in the 704, in frequent August and the 684; use caliphate of he crosses. died passed in Only the easily same the to year, issue 'Abd on of al-Malik's Amman 10 April may 685. son al-Walid convey a in different 705. message, in that the figures appear to be wearing Arab headdresses, and there are few if any crosses (though in illustrated specimens the staff between the two definitely bears a cross-bar).
moment when two brothers received the allegiance of the community as future caliphs, and a longer time when the succession was clearly established between them. A possible occasion for issue of such a type would be the accession of 'Abd

al-Malik, The This Finally, two-caliph who mint this was is coin normally obverse in raises صق‎ is extremely identified another associated question: vulnerable as with Scythopolis/Baysan, two how other position. could reverses one His of father, because mint a very produce essentially, of different the reverses size had nature. and seized of weight Both such power bear contrasting of these through the traditional coins. design, civil This war. large content remains 'Abd M, and but al- a here Malik possibility, quality? accompanied himself Conceivably, but had the not no coins better by of the course, claim of Arabic that the to the inscription mint die caliphate (there tend seems of to than the be caliph, did to carefully be Ibn only but alZubayr, engraved, by one garbled for who the with Greek was obverse) regular in legends.' fact might inscriptions recognised On have one, on been by the the most letters purloined reverse of are the and all regions or retrograde: normally somehow under a Islamic pseudo-mintmark IIE irregularly on the control. \|., reused. gamma This NIKO But below could if or not, have the CON. it M, been would and The a NN good seem closely on time the that related r. to the - advertise 0 authorities - coins appears the of stability in Gerasa/Jerash, produced the exergue. that a Marwanid very on The the limited other other rule has number would hand, ANN bring, I., of are A the more since below, 'Abd the sloppily OK succession al-Malik r., and designed, ONK type, was assured frequently in perhaps the exergue. for for employing a a special long Both time of occasion, retrograde these to come, are and from letters and rather the or no same garbled more further obverse with mintmarks.\* civil reverses die, war which need that On arise. that would is apparently basis, In fit that extremely \| case, would that this used well suggest coin on into might the Gerasa the type be local as seen already coinage. the as mint an discussed. accession The for these implications In issue, coins, other a piece words, though of this of for the propaganda some other same other "Arab-Byzantine' mint advertising place produced in the the issues an new same 'official' remains dynasty. district issue to Nothing be could naming considered. about not the be it would caliph excluded. and preclude other a types date crudely early in derived "Abd al-Malik's from the Byzantine reign, especially or local since coinage it bears in circulation. the traditional M on the reverse, rather than the © on steps that characterises his Standing Caliph coinage. As for the place of issue, a related type will provide a clue.

\*N. 5 5 6 See ' J. Metrology The For Walker, Amitai-Preiss, ANS all main these, 1998 source "A analysed see New Annual most is A. Byzantine the by Berman, conveniently Report voluminous Harry Bone S. Mint 28, Qedar, with tenth-century and in SICA his an some "The (valuable excellent /.82f. Coinage early Persian Umayyad but illustration; of unpublished) Scythopolis- historian bronze the type thesis, Tabari coins", Baysan is also discussed The 11.5746, NC and Administration 58 Gerasa-Jerash", (1935) available by George 119-126; in of Miles JNJ English Umayyad cf. 13 in A. (1994-1999) his in R. the Syria: review Bellinger, History the of 133-151 Evidence Walker's of Coins al-Tabari at from catalogue, of 148 the Jerash, XX: (type Copper The Coins Collapse "The Dil) 1928-1934. Iconography (Princeton of Sufyanid NNM 2000) of 81. Umayyad Authority New 123f. York Coinage", and 1938. the Coming 132f., Ars Orientalis no. of 551 the and Marwanids, 3 (1959) J. Walker, 207- tr. A G 213; Catalogue by Michael of the Bates, Arab-Byzantine "The 'Arab-Byzantine' and post-reform Bronze Umayyad Coinage Coins of Syria: An (London Innovation 1956) by 43, 'Abd nos. al AS Malik" and A6 in (the A Colloquium coins were in then Memory in the Amman of George Carpenter Museum), illustrated Miles (ANS, on New plate York LX. 1976) 16-27; by Shraga Qedar, "Copper Coinage of Syria in the Seventh and Eighth Century A.D.", JNJ 10 (1991) 27-39; and by Tony Goodwin in SICA \|: The Pre-reform Coinage of the Early Islamic Period (Oxford 2002) 97f.

- 7 \* 70. See See Hawting It Amitai-Preiss the was illustrations first (Albany published ef 1989) in al. Amitai-Price by (above, 159f. idem, For n. "A 4) this er Unique 148,,لم‎ event types especially Arab-Byzantine and D11 other and type sources, D1 C10 1a; Coin" of both see Gerasa, in G. are Rotter. apparently which Yarmouk strongly Die Numismatics unique. Umayyaden resembles 5 und (1993) D1 der 1a. 37f. zweite The second Burgerkrieg is illustrated (Wiesbaden in N. G. 1982) Gossous, 164 Umayyad Coinage of Bilad al-Sham (Amman 1996) p.82 no

Samarqand-Sogdian Portrait Coin / 575-625 AD By Hans Loeschner

In the This 1 The The obtained Supplement diameter portrait art as a possibly expressed of coin the to cast ONS of shows this in bronze Newsletter the this type Sogdian coin coin (from is 175 corresponds ruler Senior 23.3 an of + Consultants, 0.3 Samargand, outstanding mm, to the the overview ~Shifubi/Daishibi, Butleigh, thickness magnificent Glastonbury, of \< 1.4 wall "Money mm son-in-law paintings and circulation U.K., the weight of list and the of in Turk 3.75 summer wood-cut early-mediaeval qagan g. Obverse 1999, Datou sculptures # 233) and Sogd (575-603)" reverse with (6" from a first remarkable or are Afrasiyab of aligned half "Tsiumuji, of and portrait vertically 8" Penjikent century a contemporary on the by (see AD)" ~180° obverse. A. M. has of (11.5", Belnizki, The qagan been hair using Shehu provided style "Mittelasien the (611-618), of definition the by % Michael - facing Kunst who by Fedorov. bust der in Robert 631 Sogden", with sent Gébl, moustache In an Figure VEB "Minzpragung embassy E. and 1 A. of Seeman, pear-shaped to this China" article des Leipzig, (quotes KuSanreiches", ear a coin drops 1980). from is is depicted clearly O.1. plate Smirnova, visible. with XL, a "badly "Catalogue Austrian worn-out Academy of Sogdian image of Sciences, of Coins", a deity 1984). Moscow, or ruler 1981, (facing) as on outlined the obverse in the and article "the by heraldic Michael tamgha Fedorov, of cited Samarqand" above). on the reverse. A photo of such a coin (St. Petersburg, Eremitage, 5, 34856) was published by Eugeniy V. Zeymal in his article "Miinzen von der SeidenstraBe" on page 371 of the catalogue of the Jan - Apr 1996 Vienna, Austria, exhibition "Weihrauch und Seide - Alte Kulturen an der SeidenstraBe" (Ed. Wilfried Seipel, Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien, 1996).
Money The Ustrushana The But In ka-la-b'uk-la In circulation 1971 her first chronicles Ustrushanian Table Smirnova some was of (old in historical say an the early-mediaeval coins (1971, Chinese), early-mediaeval nothing rulers Ustrushana were data 59-64) of abuot found, which about Usrushana, published any Ustrushana, the kingdom is according Turkic Hephthalite rulers an Smirnova article between Qara of to Farghana Ustrushana Negmatov, conquest "Pervye Bughra (1981, Sogd and and so monety (Smirnova 428) in (Black/Great the it Tokharistan Farghana. gave seems archaeological iz Usrushany" the 1971, that Bughra, following In 60-64; (6" Ustrushana the - strata north a ("The first totemistic 1981, succession: dated it half first escaped 31-35, bordered of coins to name: 8" the 428; rémyS, of century the end on some Usrushana") Rtveladze destiny Chach, of ry'né, Turk the AD). 6"-7" of with stéry, tribes and which Sogd Livshits the century had ry'né and laid Syr as By Darya retained the AD. (It 1985, is Michael Smirnova foundations strange 20; Serving its Bartold Fedorov independence. that as read a she of 1963, boundary. on omitted Ustrushanian them 269). But the here In several names the the south numismatics. second of decades kings: it extended stéry, later, érdmyS mentioned Some to Ustrushana the (Sogdian single upper by reaches was name Ustrushanian her in conquered meaning the of same the coins "Descending by Zerafshan book Turks. were on page Advancing and known from 34. Gissar Mithra"); before \| have against mountains. the (2 stéry Gatifar, impression in (Buddhist the In the Samarqand the that king east name the of it bordered descending the museum, foreword Hephthalites, on and \| in from Khojend. the the catalogue the Tashkent Sanskrit Turk It was museum, were Qagan Sadacarya (as written in captured Sogd) 6 found at i.e. different a Chach, at confederation Teacher); Penjikent) Farghana, times ry'né and but of principalities Samarqand, they (according were were not cross-checked). unidentified. to Kesh, headed Smirnova Nesef by The the According and this situation ruler defeated could of to changed the derive Gatifar Smirnova strongest from when near these of the Bukhara the them. kings Buddist leading Its ca of capital 563 Tajik Sanscrit Ustrushana AD archaeologist, was (Gafurov arhand Bunjiket. were i.e. 1972, mentioned Revered). N. Apart Negmatov, 217). from This Judging only Bunjiket started means on by excavations different that the there Ustrushana, coins were forms at two found the of being other twin their in large in hillforts tamgha, archaeological the towns: midst of there Kala-i Zamin of were strata those Kahkaha and two of countries, the Shavkat. kings 6"-7" \| and with was Chinese century Kala-i the also name Kahkaha AD. chronicles conquered Satachari 2 situated referred in the and early near to two it as the 560s. kings Tsao modern with (or the town Eastern name of Tsao) Shahristan. Rakhanch. and Su-dui-shana This Judging archaeological by (old their Chinese names, site proved suo- they tuai-sana). were to be not the Turks. According capital Anyway of to early-mediaeval one Hiuen chronicle, Tsiang there (ca Ustrushana. 629 was AD) a young wrote At ruler that Kala-i the in Ustrushana Kahkaha rulers of 1 Ustrushana who and 2 between were had found 618-628 been bronze subjugated AD coins sent an (single by embassy the finds Turks, to and China. which two The hoards) means Chinese that which monk they enabled were Hiuen the not Tsiang coins Turks, of visited the themselves. Samarqand Ustrushana But and c629 later Tashkent Ap. this He called museums indigenous the realm and dynasty coins Sutulisena was found probably and at wrote supplanted Penjikent that its to by circumference another be identified one. was as Ustrushanian. 1400-1500 li (700-750 These coins km). were It was issued half in as the much name again of several as the circumference Ustrushanian kings. of Chach and somewhat less than the circumference of Kan, i.e. the Samargandian realm (Gafurov 1972, 290). Arab geographers spelled the name of the country in different ways: Usrashana, Surtshana, Ustrishana, Sutrashana. A Sogdian document from mount Mugh shows that the correct name was °strwSn' and Arab Ustrushana was closest to it (Livshits 1962, 87).

a totem, Abar Shir Ka'ads Descendants Khar The Haydar. érémys Arslan early-mediaeval Akhura (or Akhura (Arab Mr'y. Arab Khan) - a transcription), (Arab of name. Afshin lion, (Arab Haydar Akhura transcription), others Succeeded coins Chirdmish. transcription) ruled (Arab of Bughra an Ustrushana Ustrushana Iranian his transcription), Siet-a-hat Smirnova - father a a name. camel). theophoric, differed in till (old (1981, Ustrushana, Mentioned 893 a This theophoric, Chinese AD, in 34, ruler Iranian weight when 324) but by is mentioned name. transcription) Arab Iranian later (1.2-2.3 their considered came dynasty chronicle Mentioned name. g), to by size his was a Baghdad Father Arab theophoric, ca (diameter coin by suppressed 207/822. chronicles Arab of to and Ka'fs. chronicles be Iranian 18-22 served During by the Mentioned as the mm) name. Khara the earliest. Samanids. excavations for Caliph. and the In Bughra by especially 752 years Obverse: Arab He AD at 738-739. under proved he chronicles Chilkhudzhra sent appearance image the to an year be for of a 737. embassy (not the brilliant from Chirdmish. years far the general to from 794-795 contemporary China. Reverse: Kala-i and AD. defeated heraldic Kahkaha bronze tamgha the coins 1 and anti-Arab of resembling 2) Sogd. a document uprising No the silver of Greek was Babek coins found letter of in written Azerbaijan. Ustrushana i turned in upside-down. the The are Usrushanian known Arabs On called yet. form the The him sides of main Afshin Sogdian of the type (which tamgha: script. of Ustrushana was It érémy§ was the dated title MR'y, coins of to the the have, afshin rulers 30th on Chirdmish. their year of Ustrushana). obverse, of the The reign the Sogdian In bust of 841 Chaus of word a Haydar king (K4'ds). afshin with was head is executed In given tumed 794-795 by by three- the ap the Ustrushana Caliph quarters heterogram on to the was (his) MR'Y charge ruled right. (my of by Lord The Ka'is' secretly images in Aramaeic). father. praying were Which influenced to Weight his means old 1.8g. gods, by that Kushano- Diameter Ka'as' despite reign having Buddhist 20mm. continued accepted iconography. Islam. at least All till the (794/795+30) kings have 824/825. a crown of In the 820 type ap Ka'is' which first son, Haydar, appeared rebelled on the and drachms fled to of the the Arabs. Sasanian Another ruler, of Ka'ds' Khosrau sons, II Parviz Fadl, applied (590-628 to Ap). the Turk The for crowns help look and brought almost the the Turk same army but have to Ustrushana. some minor In differences. 207/822 an Arab Their army front (Haydar is decorated had shown with a pair the Arabs of spread some wings. secret Between road which the wings they there did not are know three before) pearls (forming attacked and an defeated upturned the triangle) Turks. Ka'ds and a surrendered crescent (curve to the downwards) Arabs, accepted with Islam a pearl and above. was left Two on ribbons his throne. hang down from the sides of the crown. The portraits of the kings are realistic and individualised. One can see that they are different men. The kings (with the exception of Rakhanch II, cf. Smirnova 1971, 63, table 1/6) are of Sogdian (non-Turkic) ethnic type with an oblong face, long straight nose, almond-shaped eyes. They have a moustache but no beard. In their ears there are ear-rings consisting of two pearls or precious stones (the upper one is smaller than the lower one). They have a necklace with several pearls in the middle. One type of coin, though, has the image of an elephant (Indian symbol of wisdom and the god, Ganesh) on the obverse. On the reverses of Ustrushana coins there are tamghas and legends. It is very interesting that one type of coin, in addition to the heraldic tumgha, has the image of a Nestorian cross. On the earlier coins, the images are fine and exquisite, later issues, though, show some deterioration.
There stéry MR'y. then Afshin follows Satachary one I. of Obverse: Smirnova's image of annoying Satachari inconsistencies. I. Reverse. The same In 1971 tamgha and as in on the the foreword coins of to Chirdmish. her catalogue On the of sides 1981 she of the placed tamgha: Satachari stéry \| MR'y, after Chirdmish, afshin Satachari. but in the Weight catalogue 2.15, itself 1.4, 1.3g. she placed Diameter Rakhanch 19-20 mm. after (fig Chirdmish. 3). By the way, in 1971 and in the foreword to the catalogue there were two Rakhanches (I and II) and two Satacharis (I and II) while in the catalogue there were Chirdmish, Rakhanch, then Satachari (typel), then Satachary (type 2), Satachary (type 3) then Rakhanch again (Smirnova 1971, 62; 1981, 34, 324-335). It looks as if Smirnova wrote the foreword and the catalogue at different times and did not bother to cross-check them. I, though, shall follow her article of 1971 and the foreword to the 1981 catalogue.

ry'né\_mrR'y. Afshin Rakhanch I. Obverse: image of Rakhanch I. Reverse: tamgha of the same type as on the coins of Chirdmish. On the sides of the tamgha: ry'né MR'y, afshin Rakhanch. Weight 1.2g (second coin is chipped). Diameter 22, 18 mm.

stéry MR'y. Afshin Satachary II. Type 1. Obverse: an elephant ambling to left. At the sides: stéry MR'y, afshin Satachari. Reverse: two tamghas. The first is the upturned 2 tamgha of the previous coins. The second tamgha has both (let us call them) "hands" turned to the left, one above the other (not spread V-like as with the first tamgha). Weight 2.3, 1.67, 1.6, 1.54, 1.58. Diameter 19-20 mm.

stéry MR'y. Afshin Satachary 11. Type 2. Obverse: image of Satachary II. Reverse: two tamghas as on the coins of the first type. At the sides of the tamghas: stéry MR'Y, afshin Satachari. Weight 1.67, 1.61g. Diameter 20 mm.

ry'né\_mrR'y. Afshin Rakhanch II. Obverse: image of Rakhanch II. Reverse: a tamgha like 4 in normal position (not turned upside-down) but its upper part is like that of the second tamgha on the coins of Satachari II, ie. with two "hands" turned to the left, one above the other. To the left of it is a Nestorian cross. At the sides of the tamgha: ry'né MR'Y, afshin Rakhanch. Weight 1.4, 1.4g. Diameter 20 mm.

Coins Type 1. issued Obverse: by the head afshine of a deity of Ustrushana (?), slightly in turned the 8" to century right, AD in a are bashlig, not known resembling (or rather a Phrygian not identified). cap. Reverse: But it lyre-shaped is hardly tumgha. possible that To me a dynasty this one comprising looks more at least like four a' fish rulers, (tail mentioned up, head down) in chronicles, with two viz. "fins"protruding Qara Bughra, Abar from Akhura, its right Shir side Akhura, and one "fin" Khar (Khan) protruding Akhura from did its not left issue side. any In fact coins. its There has a certain is a series affinity of bronze with coins the tamgha which, placed I believe, on can the coins fill this of gap. the All Penjikent of them ruler are united Amukian by the (Chamukian), tamgha which but the Smirmova latter has (1981, only 336, two "fins". 348-358) At described the sides of as lyre-shaped the tamgha: or prn lyre-shaped Byy..., Farnbag... with a Weight triangular 1.8g pedestal, (one coin and is (almost chipped). on Diameter all of them) 21, 20mm the name (Smirnova of the 1981, god, Farnbag. Nr. 1472-3). Most Both of them coins (8 were out found of 11) in were Penjikent found. (just as in the case of the earlier coins of Ustrushana united by the A-shaped tamgha) in Penjikent, adjacent to Ustrushana. The provenance of 2 of the coins is unknown; \| coin was found in Kuva (i.e. east of Ustrushana, in Farghana).

## @°

1? Type 2. Obverse: head of a deity (?), facing, in a bashliq (?).Reverse: lyre-shaped tamgha. At the sides of the tamgha:......كلق (Farn?)bag.... The coin is chipped. Diameter 19 mm‏ (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1474). Found in Penjikent.‏

Type 3. Obverse: head of a deity (?), facing, in a bashlig (?). Reverse: lyre-shaped tamgha. At the sides of the tamgha: prn Byy..., Farnbag.... Both coins are chipped. Diameter 18, 17 mm (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1475, 1476). Found in Penjikent.

Type 4. Obverse: bust of a deity (?), with head slightly turned to the right, in a bashliq (or diadem with pendant ribbons?). Reverse: lyre-shaped tamgha with two fins (or rather pincers) extending forward from its right side so that it somewhat resembles a scorpion. In the middle of the tamgha is a cross (there was a cross on one coin of Ustrushana with a A-shaped tamgha). AT the sides of the tamgha:... Byy..., (Farn?)bag.... Weight 2.73, 2.58g. Diameter 23-24 mm (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 14771478). 1 coin was found in Penjikent, the provenance of the second coin is not known.

Type 5. Obverse: head of a deity (?), facing. Reverse: lyreshaped tamgha. At its sides: prn Byy..., Farnbag.... Chipped. Diameter 24 mm (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1479). Found in Penjikent.
Type 6. Obverse: head of a deity (?), facing, in a bashlig (?). The the left: Byy (?). Reverse: lyre-shaped tamgha with two "fins" extending from its left side and one extending from its right side. At the sides of the tamgha: prn Byy 8'r or N'R? Farnbag... dar or nar. Weight 3.13g. Diameter 23 mm (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1480). Provenance is not known.

Type 7. Obverse: head of a deity (?), slightly turned to the right. Reverse: lyre-shaped tamgha but turned upside-down. At its sides: prn...نورق‎ Farnbag.... Chipped. Diameter 24 mm (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1434). Found in Kuva, in Farghana.

There 'wr Sw is ydde. one more Obverse: type of head coin of with a deity a lyre-shaped (?) of Turk tamgha ethnic Smirnova type. To the (1981, right: 357-358) prn, Farn. read Lyre-shaped on them tamgha 'wr dw (but 7/886 turned and supposed upside-down) that with such a coins pair were of "fins" issued (or in pincers?) the Ordu extending (camp, headquarters) forward from of its the sides. Turk The Khallach tamgha tribe. resembles a scorpion. At the sides of the tamgha: 'wr dw yd8é, Ordu Khallach. Chipped (2.3g). Diameter 24 mm (Smimova 1981, 1481). Found in Penjikent.

The Bronze last coins afshin of Ustrusana of Ustrushana, have been Sayr found b. 'Abd at Penjikent, Allah (a which Muslim), means minted that coins they there were in 279/892-3. accepted and In 280/893-4 circulated coins there. in Certainly, Ustrushana the were reverse already was being also struck true in by that Isma'il fens of Samani Penjikent (Bartold (and Samargand) 1963, 269). circulated in Ustrushana. According to Smirnova (1970, 161), drachms of Bukhar Khudat type were found in Ustrushana, indicationg that they circulated in Ustrushana serving the need for silver circulating coins.

## Farghana

Chinese chronicles named this country Fei-han, Bo-han or Pa-han-na. In Sogdian documents from Mount Mugh it was called Bry'n', Far(a)gana or Fragana. Arabs called it Farghana. The valley of Farghana is bisected by the Syr Daria and surrounded on three sides (North, East, West) by mountains. On the western edge of Farghana was Khojende. Some mediaeval authors considered it as part of Farghana, others as an independent

domain. Around The It looks The native 605 as fertile if Ap, dynasty, Alatar lands there was was however, of a Turk, the a young valley for retained his king were brother, in South Farghana, occupied Nilan, Farghana Alitsi had by a a sedentary by (south Turk name, title, of who population, the Ot Tigin. Syr sent Daria). an Nilan's while embassy The the son, nephew to surrounding Altu China. Chur, of The Kibi mountainas was circumference (killed mentioned by and Turks), of by some his alcapital arid Aliaotsan, Tabari zones was as in ruled the 4 the /i, king South valley ie. of about Farghana were Farghana. 2 populated km with (judging Livshits his by capital nomads. by (1962, its in small Farghana Khumyn 85), size though, (not and this Chach must deemed identified). have were that been Ebochji the the first native early-mediaeval was to Farghana be still subjugated ruling dynasty Kasan). North by was Turks Alitsi Farghana not in had replaced the in an beginning 656 army by when the of of several Turk he the sent until 560s thousand the 739 embassy Ap. Ap, Having warriors when to China. deafeated the (Bichurin Chinese In 658, the 1950, appointed Hephthalites the 274). Western Arslan According (ca Turks 563-565 Tarkhan were to Chinese Ab) defeated (old the Cinese Turks chronicles, by asiet-lan China, became and the d'at- the dynasty Farghana, kan) indisputable as of for the Farghana some ruler masters of period, kings all of Farghana. Central (as submitted was Asia. This also to the But the Arslan case almost Chinese. Tarkhan with immediately Samargand Farghana was mentioned after was and Bukhara) that granted by they Chinese the was started status very chronicles wars ancient of against a under and Chinese Iran, had the ruled then years province Byzantium, 741-742. the and country Aliaotsan In and 744 for then several was he bloody, sent appointed centuries. an internecine embassy ruler Like of to wars all other China Farghana started realms asking within with of to Central the marry his Turk capital a Chinese Asia, qaganate. in Kasan Farghana princess, So (Bartold Turks was which had a 1965, their was confederation 529; granted. hands Bichurin full He of without sent principalities 1950, embassies Central 319); Asia headed Gafurov to China and by in 1972, the the 745, native ruler 292-293). 749, of rulers the 751 strongest (Smirnova It of appears Central one. 1981, Asia that In 630 429). the remained aD native It Hiuen is relatively not dynasty Tsiang clear independent. continued who found was in king Farghana to They reign of Farghana paid "many in Farghana tribute rulers at the to time who the as Turks, vassals of fought caliph were (or one al-Mansir governors) supervised another". (136- He by of representatives noted Chinese 158/754-775), that emperors it had who of already the till sent Qagan the been an beginning but army so that for against was about of all 8" Farghana. 10 for century years. the most Thus The AD. part. king it In must the of have opinion Farghana started of fled Livshits about to Kashghar 620 (1962, Ap. 85). but Finally, then their peace native circa was 630 title made \[\] Ap, ySyd the and (ikhshid) Western he paid Turks attested intervened to it. In in 715, the strife the Arab and killed conqueror the king of Central of Farghana, Asia, Kibi. Qutayba, After in that alliance in North with Farghana the Tibetans (north of the (enemies Syr Daria) of China) a Turk dynasty attacked was Farghana. established The with pro-Chinese its capital king in Kasan. of Farghana Its first fled ruler, to Shuni, Kocho was (North related Turkestan), to the Ashina to the dynasty Chinese of governor. Turk gagans. Qutayba After put his death on the North trone of Farghana Farghana was a new ruled king, by Alatar his son, (old Ebochji, Chinese whose a-liadat). capital But was when also Kasan. he learnt that his sworn enemy, Sulaiman b. 'Abd al-Malik (96-99/715-717), had become caliph in Baghdad, he rebelled. Qutayba was killed by his own officers loyal to the new Caliph. The death of this brilliant general weakened the Arabs. In 715, the Chinese governor of Kucha attacked Farghana, banished Alatar and restored the pro-Chinese king of Farghana to his throne. Alatar fled to the mountains. But in 720-722 Alatar was king of Farghana again. He was killed by the Arabs in 722 (Smirnova 1970, 255-256; 1981, 429). In 726 there were two kings in Farghana: one (south of the Syr Darya with his capital in Akhsiket) was a vassal of the Arabs, the other (north of the Syr Daria with his capital in Kasan) was a vassal of the Turks (Gafurov 1972, 293).
the Arabs And a now large to tribute. the coins. Caliph These al-Mahdi series (158-169/775-785) have been attributed also to sent Farghana an army because against the overwhelming the king of Farghana majority whose of such capital coins have was been Kasan found (Bartold in the 1965, Farghana 530-531; valley. Smirnova 1981, 429).

Turko-Sogdian Type 1. Obverse: coins of to the the anonymous left of the Qagans. square hole the Sogdian These legend have y'y'n, a square gagan. hole To in the the right middle. of the hole is a lyre-shaped tamgha but different from the tamgha of the coins citing Farnbag (which, I believe, were issued in Ustrushana). The lower part of the latter tamgha is shaped like a rhombus, the lower part of the anonymous qagan's tamgha is round and the "lyre" resembles the Greek letter omega turned upside-down. It resembles the upper part of the tamgha of Bukhara. This lyre-shaped tamgha is mounted on two short vertical legs. The reverse of the coin is blank (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1435-1438). All the coins have been found in the Farghana valley (Osh region and Kuva). Weight 4.36, 3.94, 2.78, 2.75, 2.2.4g. Diameter 29, 25, 24, 23 mm.

Type la. Like type 1. The tamgha differs slightly. It has a small "fin" protruding from its left side.

Type 2. Obverse: to the left of the hole is y'y'n, gagan. To the right of the hole there is a lyre-shaped tamgha but mounted on long legs as big as the tamgha itself. Reverse: to the night of the hole:1 y' alga, which was the name of one of the clans of the nomadic Oghuz tribe (Smirnova 1981, 59, Nr. 1440-1443). All the coins have been found in the Farghana valley (Osh region and Kuva). Weight 3.5, 2.31, 2.3, 2.27g. Diameter 23, 22, 21, 19 mm.

Turko-Sogdian \*Ipw\_y'y'n twtwy. coins of Obverse: the to tutuks the right (tutuk, of the Chinese hole the dudu, Turk military runic letter governor ush. Around of the province). the other These sides coins of the have hole: a square 'Ipw y'y'n hole in twtwy, the middle. i.e. tutuk of Alp Qagan (alp in Turk is "hero"). Reverse blank (Smirnova 1981, 58, and Nr. 1445-1449). There was a town called Ush at the eastern end of the Farghana valley. Could the Turk runic letter ush refer to the name of this town? If this is so, then one might infer that Ush/Osh was a residence of the military governor who ruled that part of Farghana in the name of the Turk Qagan. Two coins have been found in Farghana (Kuva), two near Otrar (Kazakhstan), one in Varakhsha (Bukhara oasis). Weight 1.3, 1.2, 1, 1, 1g. Diameter 17, 16 mm.

Type There 1. Obverse: is a series realistic of bronze and individualised coins (without bust the portrayal square hole) of a which royal couple. is united Both by the faces image (especially of a royal that couple of the and woman) a monogram are purely of Turkic runes ush+i. If my conjecture that ush was the name of the town of Ush/Osh is correct, then this series was issued in Farghana.

mongoloid and slightly turned to each other. The man has plaits, a drooping moustache and no beard. It is a typical image of a Turk. The woman has a three-peaked hat. Reverse: in the field, a monogram of Turkic runes ush+i. Around it MRWy és' ly'ttwn\|h, Lady Bés' khatun or Lady khatun of Bés' (khatun is queen in Turk). The provenance of the coins is unknown (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1482-1484). Weight 2.46, 1.54g Diameter 24,21 mm.

Type 2. Obverse: Stylised image of a royal couple. The faces seem more European than mongoloid but the man has plaits, a drooping moustache and no beard in the Turk manner. Reverse: in the field, a monogram of Turkic runes ush+i. Around it MR'... y'tt \{wnjh, Lady khatun. The provenance of three coins is unknown all the other coins were found in Penjikent (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1485-1496). Weight 2.47, 2.15, 1.73, 1.57, 1.29g (other coins are chipped). Diameter 25-20 mm.

Type 3. Obverse: a royal married couple. Reverse: in the field, monogram of Turkic runes ush+i. Around it, traces of a legend (illegible). The Provenance of the coin is unknown (Smirnova 1981, Nr. 1497). The coin is chipped. Diameter 21 mm

Chinese Type 1. chronicles Obverse: a for horse about with six wiry centuries body (the and legs first trotting time in the right. second Around century it ywB/pry BC, the sw6r last time (?). in Reverse: AD 479) S-shaped mentioned tamgha and praised placed horizontally. highly Farghanian Above horses it 'skék of (?). a special The first breed, coin which was found they called in Farghana, the celestial the second horse. in In Penjikent the mountains (Smirnova of Farghana 1981, Nr there 1450- are ancient 1). Weight petroglyphs 3.2, 2.96g. picturing Diameter such 21, 19 horses. mm. They have a wiry, well-proportioned body, strong legs, a slender neck and a shapely head (Istoriia 1984, 188). There are bronze coins with the image of such a horse and a Sogdian legend. \| believe they were issued in Farghana.

Type 2. Obverse: The same as type 1. Reverse: Head of a deity or man slightly turned to the left. It is rather mongoloid. The straight hair is combed back and hanging down. The face occupies almost all the surface of the coin. Among the coins there are several with a blank reverse. It is not clear whether they were botched pieces or whether it was a special type. 1 coin weighs 1.27g, 1 coin weighs 3.28g. But the compact group is between 1.55 and 2.45g. The histogram gives four equal peaks: 1.7, 1.75, 1.85 and 2.1g. Diameter 22-20 mm. The provenance of six coins --- 1 x

is not known. All the other coins were found in Penjikent (Smirnova 1981, Na 1452-1471),

According to Smirnova Tokharistan (1970, 269), Farghana (like Ustrushana) did not mint silver coins and used silver drachms of the Bukhar Khudat type, minted in Bukhara and Samarqand. A certain amount of Chinese bronze coins, found in Farghana, shows that they were accepted and circulated there, but they were rather scarce.

The name In In 581 the of Ap, early Tokharistan "Khotan, 560s Ap, (Chinese Persia the Hephthalites and Tou-ho-lo) Hephthalites" was clashed mentioned rose with against for the the Turks. the Turks. first Qagan time Mandelshtam in Istemi, 383 Ap. captured wrote The territory that Farghana, these of were Chach, Tokharistan the Parak Hephthalites comprised and came of Southern as Central far as Asia, the Tajikistan, Syr because Daria. south The Southern Hephthalite of the Uzbekistan Amu king, Daria Gatifar, the and Hephthalites started Northern to Afghanistan. raise were an vassals army of In near the other Bukhara. Sasanians. words, Troops The it occupied Turks from quelled Tokharistan the area the Hephthalite of and ancient other Bactria. places uprising assembled Tokharistan and some there. Turk was invaded tribes The Sasanian settled by Hephthalites in ruler, Tokharistan. Khusraw who established In 1, 588, took a a advantage Turk kingdom army there of led this by around Qagan to invade 350 Save Ap. Tokharistan crossed In 355 they the and took Amu seize Balkh Daria, part and invaded made of it. it Having \[ran their and capital. taken advanced Samarqand, By to 415 Herat. they Kesh The had and Sasanian taken Nesef, the shah, Istemi Kabul Hormizd attacked valley. IV By Gatifar (579- 425 they near 590), Bukhara. had sent subjugated his best The warlord, Hephthalites Afghanistan Bahram were and Chubin, defeated started against and the Gatifar conquest them. killed. In the of North Scholars battle, India Bahram date (Sohail this Chubin battle Ahmad slew to some Save. Khan time The 1992, between Turks 87). 563-567, were In the defeated following or to 563, and years or to 565 the Hephthalites AD. The defeated thrice Hephthalite defeated the army Sasanian fled to shah, Tokharistan Peroz \| (459-484 and elected Ap). a new The defeats king, Faghonish, of the Sasanians a Chaghanian facilitated ruler, further who recognised Hephthalite expansion. Khusraw \| Between as his suzerain. 467-470 Soon and 480 controversy they subjugated arose Sogd between and the tured Sasanians their attention and the to Turks East Turkestan. about the By Hephthalite 510, the Hephthalites heritage. The had Turks created became an empire allies of stretching Byzantium, from a long-standing Central Asia and enemy East of Turkestan the Sasanians. to Afghanistan In 569 and Ap, northern the Turks India attacked (Gafurov the Sasanians 1972, 200). and captured some lands in Dihistan, east of the Caspian sea. They could not, however, overcome the rampart and the chain of fortresses built by Sasanians already in the 5" century to protect Iran against the Hephthalites. But some of the Turk tribes settled there and in the course of time continued their drive to the south so that later Sasanians had to build new defences against them, on the borders of Mazandaran. Peace was made in 571. The Sasanians received Kabulistan, Zabulistan, Tokharistan, Sind, and other lands. The Hephthalite ruler of Chaghanian, Faghonish, remained a vassal of the Sasanians. The Hephthalite domains north of the Amu Daria came under the control of the Turks who, by 571, had captured the North Caucasus and had come as far as Bospor (Kerch), a frontier town of Byzantium. Later, though, the Turks became allies of Iran and in 576 took Bospor. In 580 they invaded the Crimea but withdrew because internecine wars broke out within the Turk qaganate which ended by the year 603 in the creation of two Turk gaganates: Western and Eastern.

fled. The In The A son 630 Sasanian Chinese of AD, Save the shah, travelling tried Turk Khusraw to qagan, continue monk, II Tun Parviz the Hiuen Jaghbu/Tun war (590-628), Tsiang but without (630), Shehu was success. put left (618- on a Eventually the 630), valuable throne was description killed peace with by the was his help of made brother. Tokharistan. of (Gafurov the Internecine Byzantian According 1972, wars army 217-221, broke to and him out signed Gumilev the in old the a disadvantageous Turk royal 1967, qaganate. 47, dynasty 50; Istoria had Tokharistan treaty expired 1964, dictated 43, many again 47; by Istoria years rebelled the emperor previously 1984, against 231). Mauricius the and Turks warlords (582- but 602). around had captured In the 602, year Khusraw various 640 was provinces II resubjugated started a and war by created to the regain Turk dominions the qagan, territories Yshbara of their he had own. Irbis. lost. There The Strange latter were was 27 as killed large it may and in 641 seem, small by he dominions. Yuqugq, proclaimed son The of the himself Tokharians last ruler the avenger of professed the Eastern of Buddhism Mauricius Turk qaganate. and who had had a been When script dethroned his of their father own and was comprising killed. defeated In 603, and 25 when taken letters all prisoner (derived the Sasanian by from the Chinese, the armies Greek were Yuquq alphabet). concentrated fled to The the on west. main the In dominions border 638, the of Byzantium, Western were: Da-mi Turks Tokharistan (Tirmidh), Dulu proclaimed (Southern) Chi-o-ian-na Yuquq rebelled. (Chaghanian), as Khusraw Irbis Dulu Shu-man sent qagan his general, (Gumilev (Shuman), Smbat 1967, Tsui-he-ian-na Bagratuni, 203, 216). (Kabadian), who In defeated 642, Ke-do-lo Yuquq the "Kushans" Irbis (Khuttalan), Dulu (as qagan Ho- the Byzantian clashed sha (Wakhsh), with chronicle the Chinese Puat-dak-tsiang-na called but them). was defeated. The "Kushans" (Badakhshan), After that (Hephthalites) the clan O-li-ni of asked (Arkhen), Yshbara for help Irbis Tsui-mi from rebelled the (Kumed), Turks against who, Shi-tsi-ni in him. 598, (Shugnan), Yuquq had become retreated Damositedi allies of to Byzantium. Tokharistan. (Vakhan) etc. The It Just was grandson like probably Sogd of and on the other his ruling way countries, to Qagan, Tokharistan Tokharistan Tun Jabghu, that was he defeated sacked a confederation Samargand the Iranians, of principalities and Maimurg. raided Iran led The by but capture rulers withdrew of of the Tokharistan strongest because was one an internecine among facilitated them. by war Huei Turks broke Ch'ao who out (visited within had settled Turk Tokharistan qaganate. there previously. in Bagratuni 726) wrote Yuquq again that invaded made Badghis Tokharistan, his capital. defeated He died the Hephthalites in 653 and was and returned succeeded with by booty. his, son But Czhen the Sasanians Czhu. In 654, did not Czhen retain Chzu the attacked province. the The qagan Turks of crossed the Western the Amu Turks, Daria Yshbara and qagan dispersed (651-657), the garrisons attempted left to by sieze the Sasanians. the throne The of the last Qaganat, attempt to but conquer was defeated Tokharistan and was retreated made by to the Tokharistan, Sasanians where in 616-617. he was In killed 618, in Tun 659. Jabghu According became to qagan. Gumilev, In the he was early succeeded 620s he by annexed Nizak Tarkhan Tokharistan who and was gave killed it in to 709 his by son, the Tardu Arabs (Gumilev Shad, who 1967, settled 218-219, in Qunduz. 240, 443-445). Tokharistan If this was is true, a confederation Nizak Tarkhan of will realms have ruled ruled by for Hephthalite 50 years and or must surviving have been preHephthalite very young dynasties. when he ascended They recognised the throne. the I suzerainty believe there of may the Turks have been and someone paid them between tribute. Czhen In some Chzu principalities, and him. however, a change of power took place. Turk warlords/chieftains, using the military power of their tribes which they had brought to Tokharistan, suppressed the old dynasties and\_ established dynasties of their own. So the Chinese pilgrim, Hiuen Tsiang (ca 630), wrote that all 27 realms of Tokharistan had submitted to the Turks and that some of those 27 realms were ruled by Turks. Another Chinese pilgrim, Huei Ch'ao (726), wrote that Khuttal was ruled by a Turk king and that half the Khuttal population were Turks, speaking the Turk language (Bichurin 1950, 286; Gumilev 1967, 126-134; Kliashtornyi 1964, 143; Litvinsky, Solov'ev 1985, 145).
the country In Now Just 705, as to had Tish Smirnova the been became money captured laid an ally down circulation by of Arabs the the Arabs foundations and in and, that early-mediaeval with the of the king early- help of Tokharistan of Tokharistan. medieval Qutayba, Usrushanian he Hiuen had defeated fled Tsiang numismatics, to the Badakhshan. wrote rulers that of so the Akharun Rtveladze One people of and of (1980, the Shuman. Tokharistan strongest 53-58; In principalities 709-710 used 1983, gold 75; Qutayba, and 1987, was silver 218-224) Khuttalan. with in trade, the laid help and Its down that king of the Tish, their was foundations coins quelled a Turk; differed a Arabs of rebellion the from called early- the by him Tokharian coins medieval Sabal. of other numismatics rulers He countries ruled led by from of Nizak which the the Surkhan Tarkhan. he end had of visited Daria the Qutayba 7" valley. before century arrested According Tokharistan. صم‎ the till ruler the to of early The Rtveladze, Tokharistan money 730s. money circulation An (his inscription circulation name, and Nadunili monetary in on this the or area system murals Pandunili, in the of in second early-mediaeval is the mentioned half palace of the of in Varkhuman, the Tokharistan 5" - Chinese first half chronicle) a were of king the stongly of 6" Samargand and century influenced sent AD him (third was to by quarter served Damascus those by of of the the Sasanian where 7" drachms century) he Iran. was of states still For Peroz at being that I least and Chaghan kept 80 by years the as imitations a khudat the hostage Sasanians (this of in such was 715. paid drachms. the tribute In title 718-719, of to Different the the Hephthalites the Chaghanian Chinese types of ruler) chronicle and coins Sasanian had circulated states the Turkic that drachms in Di-chze name different were Turantash. of areas. Chze-han-na the main Thus In 719 (Tish coins in the Chaghanian Chaghan of circulating Chaghanian) khudat there in was was Tokharistan. circulated Tish the ruler the mainly After One-eyed. of Tokharistan. authentic the fall Tish of drachms the is It seems an Hephthalites, Iranian of Peroz that name Qutayba I with South but countermarks thanked Tokharistan he had the his Turk ally was containing by for title appointing a jabghu. period a Bactrian under him (x5no) ruler the of Sasanians or Tokharistan. Sogdian and (ywB) was The legend son included of or Nadunili tamgha in the survived (rhombus sphere of and mounted Sasanian retained on money his a short appanage. circulation. horizontal In 727 It line). comes he sent About as a no letter 150 surprise, to such the Chinese coins then, have that emperor. been even found. He after was Tokharistan Infrequent probably imitations that had ruler freed of of Tokharistan Peroz's itself from drachms who, the in also Sasanians 731 are and found (only 737, (issue fought to be Nr. the subjugated 287 Arabs according as by an the ally to Gébl's Turks) of the classification) its Turks. monetary S. G. Kliashtornyi with circulation the Bactrian continued thought countermark that to Tish be based was @Ayovo. the on ruler the Four of Sasanian Chaghanian such coins monetary who, have been in system 737 found and together that to my its with knowledge. coins the (especially Arabs, In fought the silver) Termez against were region the minted Turks and on in and the the valley Sogdians pattern of of and Sasanian Sherabad fell in coins, Daria battle. copying river For were the the drachms year found 159/775-6 of only Peroz (?-M. there I (459- F.) is mention 484) imitations and of Khusraw of one, Peroz's Chaghan \| drachms (531-579). Khudat, (issue Also an Nr. ally a 287 lot of the of according genuine Arabs and to Sasanian Gébl's enemy of classification) silver Muqanna' coins (mostly who with headed countermarks of Peroz the anti-Arab I containing and Khusraw uprising the profile of I) 159-167/775- continued of a ruler to (two 784 circulate in types), Sogd there. an (Gafurov image of 1972, an animal 226-230; or bird, Rtveladze or a badly 1987, worn-out 224; Bactrian Kliashtornyi legend. 1964, The 146-147). circulation of the large number of authentic drachms of Peroz \| in the Chaghanian domain has been construed as evidence that Chaghanian belonged to the Sasanians, while the appearance of the countermarks indicated that the Sasanians had lost Chaghanian for a certain period. The absence in Chaghanian of drachms of Kavad (488-531) has been construed as evidence that the Sasanians lost Chaghanian. The absence in the Sherabad

Daria The river difference basin of authentic in the composition drachms of of Peroz the coins has been circulating taken as in evidence different that areas it has did been not belong seen as to evidence the Sasanians of the (Litvinsky, political Solov'ev separation 1985, of those 137; adjacent Rtveladze areas. 1983, With 75). this I I cannot cannot agree but agree. with this. This Peroz political I was separation defeated strengthened three times and after taken the Hephthalites prisoner twice were by defeated the Hephthalites. by the Turks Twice in 563 he AD paid them a huge ransom and an annual tribute in addition. This is was why the main bulk of silver coins which circulated in Chaghanian were authentic drachms of Peroz 1. Also it is hardly possible that Chaghanian belonged to the Sasanians while the Sherabad Daria valley (so to speak "squeezed in" between the Sasanian realm proper and Chaghanian) was independent.

## Chaghanian

According First The Some In my appearance dynasty. imitations to opinion, Rtveladze, From of of the Peroz the the drachms in end Peroz early-mediaeval I drachms of the I of imitation 5" Peroz (Rtveladze century I Chaghanian drachms came to the 1987a, first, first with there 140- then half the were of imitations legend 141) the at have 6" King least century three appeared, three of Alhons countermarks: Ap, dynasties and, Chaghanian and later, the which spread Sogdian countermarks (being succeeded of yw, countermarking part one of Bactrian were Sogd) another. made. was xdno, indicates under If and my the surmise the Hephthalites tamgha that of the the and legend ruling in that King dynasty area of circulated Alhons of Chaghanian: (on authentic the margin drachms a rhombus of the of Peroz coins) mounted \| was (459-483) on not a horizontal countermarked and locally line. Other but minted engraved imitations imitations on of the Peroz of original his I drachms drachms die is (Riveladze (Rtveladze right \[Editor's 1980, 1987a, note: 54-55, 142-143) such coins Table have with 1/3; the a different 1987a, legend 144-145). actually combination engraved In my of opinion, as countermarks: part of the the countermarks x8no, coin design rhombus which are tamgha in appeared fact and illustrated on square these coins in countermark Mitchiner were a mark (5x5 Oriental mm) of Coins Chaghanian's with the and miniature their growing Value, image Non-Islamic independence, of a man's States, head not turned pp from 20-21\], to the the Sasanians then right. the The sequence man but has from could neither the have crown, central been moustache the Hephthalite following: nor beard, power. firstly, but plain The he countermarks has imitations a luxuriant of Peroz were mane drachms placed of curled on were hair. the plain minted, The ethnic margins then type drachms (Sasanian is Iranian with coins (not the then Turkic). legend had King plain of margins: Alhons (engraved either the on dies the were die) smaller appeared than and the then flans, all or the plain previous margins coins were (including left on the those dies themselves). with the legend But sometimes King of Alhons) it is not were clear countermarked. whether it is a real It is countermark also difficult or to whether say which it was of engraved the countermarks on the original were contemporary die. So on coin with Nr. each 44 (Rtveladze other and 1987a, which were 144-145) minted the at twice different repeated times. inscription In some cases which it Rtveladze has been possible read as "King to establish of Alhons" this where seems one to countermark be engraved overlaps on the die. another. Anyway this legend (in Bactrian script, derived from the Greek alphabet) is too big for a normal countermark. Other inscriptions: x6no (khidevking. Bactrian) and ywB (Awab-lord, Sogdian ) are countermarks alright. Surprisingly in Rtveladze's album "The ancient coins of Central Asia" (Tashkent, 1987) many coins are given retrograde. On a coin published in his article (1980, 55, Table 1/3) Peroz I is turned to the right (correct), on coins in the album Peroz I and Khusraw I (Rtveladze 1987a, 140-141, 144-147) are turned to the left (incorrect). The reverse of a Khusraw I drachm (p. 146) is given upside-down. About coin Nr. 42 (p.140) Rtveladze wrote that there is a tamgha at "9 o'clock" but, in the picture, this tamgha is at 3 o'clock and so on.
a change Rtveladze Livshits Second in monetary dynasty. considered (1987, One policy 223) that, way thought and because or must the that of other, have the the been form in end the of connected of second the this lettering, dynasty half with of was the the the 75 Sogdian coming connected century countermark to AD with power a new the of series conquest ywB, some of could coins new of not Chaganian dynasty appeared have been in in by Chaghanian. Chaghanian: Khusraw made later \| Anushirvan Rtveladze than imitations the end (1980, of (531-579). of the the drachms 54, 5 1987, century Let of 223) Khusraw us (Rtveladze examine named I. During it this 1987, the proposition. the "dynasty 233). first So decades of in The the his conquest anonymous album, of the reign Rtveladze of khidevs" of at Khusraw least (1987a, of part Chaghanian, \| (531-579) 140-144) of Tokharistan dated tension dated such it mounted by to coins the Khusraw end to between the of end the I was the 5™ of to the facilitated Hephthalites the 5" first to the and half and beginning of carried the the Sasanians; 6" of out century the circa 6" Khusraw century. AD, 563 and when was Was established loathe the he deliberately armies to that pay the the of tamgha redating Tokharistan Hephthalites of the this dynasty (Chaghanian the dynasty tribute in doing which was included) this? a his romboid He went predecessors had north mounted previously to had join on dated paid. a Gatifar short this He series horizontal preparing bided to his the for line. time end the to of all-out overthrow the 5" battle to the the with first humiliating the half Turks. of the But Hephthalite 6" after century. the battle yoke. The of Sogdian Relations Bukhara countermark between (563), the the could Hephthalites defeated have Hephthalite been and the the earliest Sasanians army one, made grew while its more way the others back and more to could Tokharistan hostile. have been So where it made is simply a in new the impossible Hephthalite first half of that, the king, 6" during Faghonish century. those \| consider (ruler years, the of the Hephthalites Cahdhanian) date first offered would was by start Rtveladze elected. minting Faghonish to imitations be the correct of recognised Khusraw one. Khusraw Anushirvan's I as his drachms. suzerain. As Negotiations far as the started the authentic between the Khusraw Turks and Anushirvan's Iran. According drachms to the are treaty concerned, of 571, they the got Sasanians to Chaghanian received Kabulistan, rather as part Zabulistan, of a tribute Dardistan, he continued Tokharistan, to pay the Sind Hephthalites. and other lands. But after The the ruler Turks of Chaghanian, had defeated Faghonish, the Hephthalites remained (ca a 563), vassal the of Khusraw. situation changed The Hephthalite drastically. domains Thus north imitations of the Amu of Daria Khusraw (with \| the Anushirvan's exception drachms of Chaghanian) could have came appeared under the no sway earlier of than the 563 Turks or (Gafurov 565 or 571 1972, (when, 218; according Gumilev 1967, to the 47). treaty, So Faghonish Tokharistan was came the tuler under of the Chaghanian sway of Khusraw). till at Rtveladze's least 571 supposition inclusive. There that new is information coins (the Khusraw that Khusraw imitation I crossed drachms) the were Amu minted Daria, advanced by a second to Khuttalan dynasty, however, and killed seems the to Hephthalite me quite plausible. king, Akhshonvar, But did Faghonish but this was belong a title to the rather old than ("anonymous a name: axSonwar khidevs" means with romboid bearer of tamgha) power, sovereign dynasty or (Gafurov to the new 1972, dynasty? 199, The 218). new If coins this was differed not the from same the campaign old imitations carried of Peroz out I by drachms Khusraw in that in there the year were of countermarks the battle between with the names the Turks of rulers. and the We Hephthalites, see here quite it could a different mean policy that some and time a somewhat after the greater treaty of degree 571 was of signed independence (and before than he was died the in 579) case Khusraw I carried out a campaign against Tokharistan. But what for? According to the treaty, Tokharistan belonged to him. There could be two possibilities: 1) either the campaign was carried out around the year 563 and Akhshonvar was a king of Tokharistan who did not join Gatifar, or 2) Khusraw annexed Khuttalan, which was not given to him by the treaty of 571 and Akhshonvar was king of Kuttalan.

with Rtveladze Rtveladze Obverse: At Type Reverse: These the the "anonymous 59 Budrach A. Beaded Within coins (1987, (1987, Weight were hillfort 223; 223-224) (beads the khidevs". struck beaded 1983, 2.35-2.67g, (the lozenge-shaped) managed from 75; then circle, Also 1987a, at capital least as to the 144,146) read on 7 circle rhombus of different the three Chaghanian) (diameter obverse. read names tamgha obverse on the An on 17 a countermark countermarks the (Pugachenkova hoard mm). fire-altar countermarks: Outside (Pugachenkova (ateshdan): of on the the 1981, the circle, old ceppo a 251-255). imitation dynasty 1981, pillar plain (or mounted 251) margins disappeared Khusraw cappo) of Khusraw on 5-3 drachms three xdno mm from I broad. (or the ie. imitation at two) new Soshro least Within receding coins. three coins (or the names. Sursho) was circle, slabs found. bust and He khidev, considered of There topped the Eoptvo shah were with that in two xdno merloned this three varieties i.e. new Zarino (or crown dynasty of two) coins: khidev, (head ruled overhanging type in and Chaghanian profile, A noyvp(o) - 59 turned coins, slabs. in or the moivoio type to Sometimes the second B-5 right, xdno coins. half the shoulders i.e. pillar of the Poghnsh(o) is facing) 6" shaped to the with or like beginning Poino beard a sand-glass. and khidev. of moustache the He 7® The attributed century. fire and on curly On the to some this hair altar dynasty gathered is imitation pictured a in ruler Khusraw as a bunch a pictured triangle at drachms his on of 4 the neck. rows there square He of are is dots. countermark. wearing also First countermarks row: a necklace Judging 6 dots; with by and second the ear-rings. the row: sequence effigy 4 dots; From of of a third the ruler the row: countermarks, shah's with 3 dots; an shoulders aquiline fourth Rtveladze row: rise nose, 1 two dot. deemed large fluttering The round altar that slightly Soshro ribbons. is flanked was bulging This by the two was earliest eyes, guards a fashion short of or them. mobeds with curly He the hair identified (full-length, Sasanians. and large Poino facing) Thus, ears with according with with the king bent earrings. of elbow to Chaghanian, the The and Byzantine one ethnic hand, Faghonish, chronicle, type touching is and Iranian Shapur the contradicted altar, (not II appeared and Turkic). the Smirnova other before Usually hand (1967, his resting these army 39) countermarks who on "in a a sword thought cloud (or of that are metal ribbons" repeated Faghonish poker (Trever, for three was stirring times Lukonin Sogdian the and fire?). 1987, Byy are so sty. 19). placed There The that, Arabs is no if they had inscription were no letter linked on the "م"‎ by obverse. so lines, they they reproduced would form it as an an equilateral "f' which triangle. made - ki A. Pugachenkova But letters + deemed (gh) and that ع‎ (') the are countermarks easy to mistake were made for one on the another. coins So after originally the death it of may Khusraw have been \[1 (579) Fa'n+ish. for, on Fa'n/Pa'n some coins, is they close overlap to mow Khusraw's Poin. It sounds crown, plausible, which was but hardly then Faghonish possible in (and his lifetime. not Soshro) These would three be countermarks, the earliest. As in I her have opinion, shown, proclaimed the Khusraw' the independence imitation drachms of Chaghanian. could not have Two been imitation minted Khusraw earlier than drachms 563 or are even ecxeptionally 571. And this interesting (563 and 571) because was they the time have when a countermark Faghonish with was mentioned the tamgha in which the written Rtveladze sources. (1980, The 55, latest 1987a, in this 146-147) series, attributed according to to the Rtveladze third (the (1983, latest) 75) dynasty were of of Caghan Khusraw Khudats. imitation It is drachms a rhombus with with the two name crooks of the protruding Chaghanian from ruler its upper nvapo and xéno, lower end. placed They on the are reverse turned at in each different side of directions the fire-altar. so that The the obverse tamgha is resembles anepigraphic. a retrograde §. diameter 27-28 mm

## dies. Type B. Weight (Pugachenkova 1981, 256). 2.65-2.67g, diameter 25-26 mm
Obverse: Reverse: These These imitations 5 coins Within Within were the differ the same struck same from circle circle from authentic as as at on on least the drachms coins obverse, 2 different of of type a Khusraw fire-altar A, reverse bust \| of dies. consisting in the size shah and in of standard merloned a narrow of crown fineness. pillar (head (metal The in profile, tube?) imitations turned mounted had to the far on right, more two shoulders receding copper than slabs facing). authentic and The topped Sasanian crown with drachms. differs two overhanging slightly When the from slabs. Budrach the From type hoard the A crown. middle was found, Also, of the the in pillar coins front rise were of it two covered is ribbon-shaped a crescent with and a green decorations. six-pointed crust of oxydized star. The The fire beard on copper. the protrudes altar They is are depicted forward. smaller as The and a triangle hair lighter is of cut (2.35-2.67g, 4 short rows of and short 25-28 there vertical is mm) no strokes. bunch than authentic of First locks row: at Sasanian the 4 neck. strokes; The drachms second shah has row: (3.91-3.95g, a necklace 3 strokes; and 27-32 third ear-rings. row: mm). 2 From strokes; Pugachenkova his fourth shoulders row: (1981, rise 1 stroke. 259) two fluttering The thought altar ribbons. that is flanked both Above by the two the Khusraw guards right or ribbon imitation mobeds is an drachms (full-length, E-shaped and symbol facing) the countermarks with (tamgha?). both hands were There resting made is no at on legend the a sword mint on (or the which obverse. metal was poker situated for in stirring the capital a fire?). of Chaghanian There are no (now inscriptions the Budrach on the hillfort). reverse. I entirely agree with her.

Third Type dynasty. 1. Obverse: There Bust are image copper of coins a royal with couple the image with faces of a royal slightly couple turned and towards a tamgha each shaped other. as The a rhombus man has with long staight two curves hair protruding hanging down from the its side upper of and his lower face and end. a The crown upper or curve diadem is turned decorated to the with left, wings the and lower a to crescent. the right, Under so that and the above tamgha the resembles crescent there a retrograde is a dot. The §. The woman first has such long, coin straight was published hair hanging in down 1880. the During side the of her 1960s face. and1970s, Above her such head coins there were is the found same at crescent Kulialtepe, with Khalchaiyan, two dots (above Turakhanbaitepe, and beneath it). Or lakhshibaitepe, is it a kind of Dalverzintepe, hair-dress decorated Savrindzhantepe with a crescent? and Budrach Both the (Rtveladze man and 1987, the woman 218). All are wearing these archaeological a necklace. To the sites right are of the situated image there in the are some Surkhandaria worn sysmbols valley (southern (legend?). Uzbekistan) Reverse: In in the the field territory there is of a mediaeval tamgha of Chaghanian. the third dynasty (Rtveladze 1987, 219). Weight 2.4, 1.6, 1.4, 1.2g. Diameter 22-20 mm.

Type 2. Obverse: Within a beaded circle, the image of a king and queen with faces slightly turned towards one another. The king has a moustache. Both of them have a necklace and diadem with a crescent and two dots above and below. Reverse: Within a beaded circle, the tamgha of the third dynasty but with a dot inside the rhombus. To the sides of the tamgha there is a Bactrian legend which Rtveladze (1987, 219) read as an(o) ott 17000 or an(o) ott yoda/o. This, in his opinion, represents two names linked by the conjunction ott "and". Livshits read it as ton/yp Eado but Rtveladze rejected this reading on the grounds that there are nine, not eight letters. Weight 0.8g. Diameter 19 mm.

The These It is upper difficult coins chronological have to say an for affinity what limit reasons with for these the the coins Turko-Sogdian countermarks was established coins were when with placed the one on image the of them imitations of a royal was of found couple drachms together and of monogram Peroz with I a and of fals Turkic Khusraw of caliph runes I. ush+i Muhammad They which may have al-Mahdi (if my been conjecture (775-785), political that or while economic. ush here another was The the such countermarks name coin of was the town found with the of together Ush/Osh) head of with a were local an ostracon issued ruler placed in with Farghana. on an Arab the coins Anyway inscription three one times dating of them (one to was the of them end found of overlapping 7"- in Farghana. first half the of crown 8" century of Khusraw AD. The lower I) were chronological made for a limit political was established reason: they from demonstrated the fact that the that tamgha, the Chaghanian resembling the principality retrograde had §, become was placed independent on the from imitations the Sasanians. of Khusraw's The drachms. same may Bearing have been in mind the case that with the countermark the countermarks with this bearing tamgha the was names placed of Chaghan on the Khudats. latest, anepigraphic, Some countermarks, imitations though, and that may it overlapped have been countermarks made for economic with the reasons, image of as the a ruler mild or form with of a Bactrian exploitating legend, the currency. Rtveladze It may considered have been that that, such when countermarks "foreign" appeared imitations "not were earlier brought than to the Chaghanian, first half of they the were 7" century". countermarked So he dated at the the Chaghanian third dynasty mint to and the the first owner half of of the such 7\*- coins second had half to pay of the some 8" fee century. to the Chaghanian (Rtveladze mint. 1980, 221-222). I totally agree with him on this point and am convinced that a change of the ruling dynasty in Chaghanian took place near the beginning of the 7" century and was connected with the infiltration of Turk tribes into Tokharistan either ca 603, when the Turks helped the native rulers of Tokharistan to free themselves from the Sasanians, or rather ca 620 when qagan Tun Jabghu (618-630) annexed Tokharistan and gave it to his son, Tardu Shad, who settled in Qunduz. The Turk warlords brought with them their tribes, the source of their military power. It was nothing unusual for a Turk warlord, having settled in some principality, to remove the native ruling dynasty and establish there a dynasty of his own. A Sogdian inscription on a mural in the palace of Samarqandian ikhsid Avarkhuman (the third quarter of the 7" century), states that the name of then ruler of Chaghanian was Turantash, which meant that he was a Turk. By the way, the fact that imitations of Sasanian drachms were counermarked with the tamgha of the third (Turk) dynasty of Chaghanian rulers shows that such coins continued to circulate during their time. As already mentioned above, Hiuen Tsiang (ca 630. wrote that the Tokharians used gold and silver in trade, and their coins differed from the coins of other countries. As we see, at least in the time of the third dynasty, bronze coins also were used in trade.

## Termez (and Guftan)

South of Chaghanian was situated the principality of Temez. Its rulers had the title Termez Shah. North-west of it was the principality of Guftan. They seem to have constituted a single money circulation area since coins with the same countermarks on the obverse, on the right-hand side (fig 1), or on the left-hand side

## (fig 2), were found in both of them. Fig. 2 AC

## Fig. 1 t
According I It think looks one as countermark if to a Rtveladze certain amount was (1987a, applied of Sogdian 41) in in Termez the bronze Termez and coins the realm other may in anepigraphic also Guftan have so circulated that copper the coins coins in the with circulated principality these two with of countermarks the Termez stylised as, image circulated north of of a freely ruler Termez, wearing in both a Sogdian principalities. a winged fen of crown Urk According (obverse), Vartramuka to Rtveladze and was tamgha found (1980, (reverse). (Albaum 53-54; Unfortunately 1983, 1960, 38). 75) in he the did Termez not give region a description and Sherabad of this tamgha. Daria valley In his (Guftan) opinion these were coins found were only from (?-M. about F.) imitations the same of time Peroz's as the drachms coppers (issue of the third Nr. 287 dynasty in of G6bl's Chaghanian. classification) Some of with the Termez countermarks coins containing were concave, the others profile flat. of \| a agree ruler with (two Rtveladze's types), an dating image of of these an animal copper or coins bird, of or Termez a badly realm worn to out the Bactrian same time legend. as the In 1975 copper at Kutlugshakhtepe coins of Chaghanian (6 km with south-west the §-shaped of Sherabad) tamgha (7"- an imitation third quarter of a Peroz of 8" century). I drachm was found with seven (!) countermarks. On the obverse, apart from the omnipresent countermarks (figs. 1, 2), there was an oval countermark with some effaced image (Nr. 3), one oval countermark with the head (turned to the left) of a man in a spiked helmet (Nr. 4), and another, badly effaced countermark (Nr. 5). On the reverse there was a countermark (Nr. 6. with the head of an elephant (?), and a countermark with a worn out inscription (Nr. 7). The fact that some countermarks were badly worn out shows that they were the earliest and that, after those countermarks were applied, the coins circulated for quite a long time.

In the Anepigraphic 2) 1( Vakhsh a a circle circle valley coins. with with (Ho-sha Vakhsh four In four 1969, of curves curves valley Chinese near protruding protruding Kafir chronicles) Kala from from hillfort, circulated it. it. They The a local hoard bronze of 245 divide curves coins, coins divide the was and circle found. silver the circle in drachms Like four in Sogdian four equal (Sasanian equal fens parts. parts they and So imitations) had so as that not a hole the to which in the circulated middle, resemble tamgha but throughout resembles it a was swastika round the a (oriented swastika whole (not square). of to (oriented the Tokharistan. right) The to coins one the of So were left) the at Chorghul greyish because tepe curves with a the a hoard circle is bronze turned of in 400 the from in middle; imitations the which opposite they of were Peroz direction. cast \| drachms contained From was the a found considerable with upper countermarks amount part of of the (Sogdian tin. circle On legend the (between obverse or two anepigraphic). there of the were curves) Also two a a varieties certain of amount tamgha: vertical stroke of Sogdian protrudes fens so circulated that the tamgha there. resembles Fens of Samargand a (Tarkhun), tortoise with Penjikent its head (citing extending Goddes forward. Nana) The and Samitan have reverse been found is blank. in the Such Vakhsh coins valley. were Local found cast bronze at the coins were of excavations three types: of anepigraphic, Adzhina tepe with in a the Sogdian archaeological or with a Bactrian legend stratum (Litvinsky, which contained Solov'ev 1985, coins of 136-137). Penjikent issued in the first quarter of the 8" century and Umayyad dirhems of the first half of the 8" century. Davidovich (1979, 79-80) dated such coins to the last quarter of the 75 - first quarter of the 8" century AD. Two different varieties of tamgha suggest that the coins were issued by at least two different rulers.

# QE)

The metrology of such coins is as follows. The weight of the coins ranges between 0.6-3.55g, but the main bulk is between 0.6\|.8g. The peak of the histogram is 1g (40 coins, ), then follow peaks of 1.1 (28 ), 1.2 (27 ), 1.3 (26 ) and 0.8g (19 ). Bearing in mind that the coins lost some weight in circulation and while being cleaned, the intended weight would have been somewhere around 1.2-1.3g. Smirnova (1981, 544-546) made 16 histograms of the contemporary Sogdian bronze fens. There in fact are histograms (Nr. 6, 14, 15) with their peaks at 1.3g. So in the Kafir Kala hoard there was a group of coins with intended weight about \|.2-1.3g. To this group also belong coins weighing 0.68 and 0.7g. Coins of the second group had a weight ranging from 1.4 to 1.8g. The peak is 1.5g (18 ). Then follow 1.4g (17 ), 1.6g (9 ), 1.8g (9 ) and \|.7g (7 ). 1 think the intended weight of these coins was about \|.5-1.6g. Among the weight histograms of contemporary Sogdian coins (Smirnova 1981, 544-546) there is a histogram (Nr. 11) with its peak at 1.5g and a histogram (Nr. 5) with its peak at 1.6g. So it appears that, in the Vakhsh valley, there were the same weight standards for coins as there were in the contemporary Sogdian realm. In the Kafir Kala hoard there are coins weighing between 1.9-2.4g. Among the weight histograms of contemorary Sogdian coins (Smirnova 1981, 544-546) there is a histogram (Nr. 8. with its peak at 2.2g and another (Nr. 16) with its peak at 2.3g. And finally in the Kafir Kala hoard there is a coin weighing 3.55g. Among the weight histograms of contemporary Sogdian coins (Smirnova 1981, 544-546) there is a histogram (Nr. 3) with its peak at 3.5g. The coins of the Kafir Kala hoard are closer to being oval in shape. So they have two diameters: 13-14, 13-15, 14-15, 14-16, 15-16, 16-17, 17-18, 18-19mm.

Coins Obverse: I with believe Sogdian Sogdian there legend could inscription be (found two wzwrk at possibilities: the excavation MLK' either علق‎ of Adzhina the (Livshits' "Great reading). King" tepe). was Reverse: cited as Stylised suzerain imitation of the ruler of of Chinese Vakhsh, legend. or the nominal Livshits thought supreme ruler these of coins Tokharistan should was be considered at that time ruler as the of the local Vakhsh issue serving valley. Early-mediaeval domestic trade in Tokharistan the Vakhsh (just valley. like But Sogd, the Farghana title wzwrk and MLk', Ustrushana great ) was king, a confederation could mean that of petty they kingdoms/principalities belonged to the allTokharistan headed by the issue. ruler The of finds the strongest of such of coins, them. however, His power are was not known mostly nominal. from the Depending neighbouring on the dominions, political situation, Kafirnigan the title and of supreme Surkhan Daria ruler could valley pass (Litvinsky, from one Solov'ev appanage 1985, ruler 136-137). to another. So it was with Chagan khudat Tish who became supreme ruler of Tokharistan with the help of his ally, the Arab general, Qutayba. There is one more possibility. In the second half of the 12" century AD, the Qarakhanid khaganate disintegrated into appanage principalities. The smaller a principality was the more pompous titles its ruler put on his coins. Litvinsky and Solov'ev (1985, 136-137) did not provide information about the metrology of the coins with Sogdian legend.

Coins with Bactrian legend Kobadian (found mainly (?) in the Kobadian oasis but some coins were found also at Adzhina tepe and Kafir kala). These coins are cast from bronze and have a round hole in the middle. Litvinsky and Solov'ev (1985, 136) did not give any metrology nor description for these coins. Mandelshtam and Pevzner (1958, 312, 318), who was the first to publish such coins (from Munchak -Tepe, in Kobadian) provided a photo (and scale). Two coins were oval: 20x19 mm. One coin
had a According In diameter that same of to 18 Smirnova article mm. There I wrote (1958, is about a 259-260), legend the on coins manner the obverse, were of found coining while at the Munchak money reverse in tepe early-mediaeval is which blank. have Mandelshtam a Sogd, triskeles-like and and about tamgha Pevzner prices, on (1958, the or obverse rather 312) thought and, purchasing on the the reverse, power alphabet of a legend of early-mediaeval the written legend was in Sogdian "half-cursive derived coins. from script... They Aramaean close were (like to the the same Sogdian). script in which early-mediaeval Livshits R. Girshman (Litvinsky, Tokharistan, named Solov'ev, Tokharian". Ustrushana 1985, It is very and 47) established interesting. Farghana. But that In my there it was article was cursive one "Money distinction Hephthalite-Bactrian circulation in Tokharistan. in early-mediaeval (derived Sogdian from the Sogd drachms Greek (6" were - first alphabet). nummi half of subaerati The 8" century legend and Ap.)" Sogdian happened I established fens to were be retrograde. that cast the out y- of Livshits shaped bronze. tamgha/tamgha Imitations read it as of wzrk Sasanian of MLK. the drachms It ikhshids is not of out of Peroz Samarqand of the I and question Khusraw was that the \| such tamgha minted coins in of a Tokharistan belonged ruling clan to the were of local the of Chionite issue solid of metal the tribes. Kobadian though Coming their realm. from fineness the East, was lower the tribes than split that of at the some authentic point after Sasanian which drachms. part of Some them proceeded copper coins westwards, also were took minted Samarqand in Tokharistan. and created their kingdom there. At the same time, another part of the Chionite tribe, led by the same clan, went south and created their kingdom in some region of Tokharistan. Both in Samargand and Tokharistan coins were issued with a y-shaped tamgha. In that same article \| established that the triskeles was the tamgha of the rulers of Kesh. So history repeated itself: some tribes of the conquerors (Chionites?), led by the ruling clan with the triskeles tamgha, proceeded westwards and took Kesh, while another part of these tribes, led by the same triskeles ruling clan, went south and created their realm in Tokharistan (Kobadian).

Albaum, References Bartold, Davidovich, Gafurov, Gumilev, Smirnova, Bartold, Bichurin, Istoriia Istoriia Kliashtornyi, Livinsky, Livshits, Mandelshtam, Pugachenkova, Rtveladze, Rtveladze, Rtveladze, Rtveladze, Rtveladze, 1964. 1984. V..لا‎ L. V. B. N. L. B. 0. E. E., E. E..ع‎ V. V. 1. A. G. N. E. Ia. A., S. Istoriia Istoriia V. V. 1. V. V. 1975. Livshits, A. 1965. 1963. A. 1962. 1972. G. 1967. 1958. G. 1950. Solov'ev, 1987. 1987a. 1980. 1983. M., A. 1979. 1964. Zhivopis' "Fergana", Turkestan Juridicheskie Tadzhiki. Kirgizskoi Drevnie Tadzhikskogo Pevzner, 1981. "Monety Sobranie "Po "K "Rannesrednevekovye V. Drevnie Klady Drevnetiurkskie V. istorii 1985. povody "Unikal'naia Afrasiaba, 5. Tiurki, S. drevnikh Drevneishaiia, v drevnego svedenii SSR, 1985. Sochineniia, monety Pamiatniki epokhu luzhnogo B. dokumenty dinasticheskikh naroda, 1958. Moskva. tom Srednevekovaia Srednei ه‎ i mongol Tashkent. gruppa Penzhikenta", srednevekovykh runicheskie narodakh, \|, "Raboty Uzbekistana tom drevnei Frunze. t. i monety drevniaia pis 3, Azii, 'skogo monet 2, Moskva. 'ma, kniga cviazei Kafirniganskogo pis obitavshikh pamiatniki, Tashkent. Chaghaniana kul nashestviia, chaganianskogo Sogdiiskie v 'mennosti, Trudy i Eftalitskoe 1, monet 'tura Khorezma (p. Moskva. 527-538). v s i Sochineniia, Srednei srednevekovaia dokumenta otriada Chaganiana yremia", parnym Tashkent. Moskva. chekana Tadjikistana, Tokharistana, Tadzhikskoi v Azii izobrazheniem", VI Baktriia-Tokharistan 1952-1953 s v.", v arkheologicheskoi v t. gory Moskva. rannee drevnie 1985. 1, istoriia, Kul'tura Moskva. Mug, gg.", srednevekov'e", vremena, vyp. Moskva. Proshloe i Trudy iskusstvo 2, na expeditsii, chtenie, Tom Tadzhikskoi drevnem Srednei drevnego 2, VKF perevod Moskva-Leningrad. MIA, Azii, i AN srednevekovom arkheologicheskoi Khorezma, UzSSR, 66, Dushanbe. i kommentarii Moskva- 1. 198\}. Vostoke. V. A. expeditsii, Livshitsa. Leningrad. Tezisy dokladov MIA, 66, konferentsii, Moskva-Leningrad. posviashchennoi desiatiletiiu luzhnoTadzhikistanskoi arkheologicheskoi ekspeditsii, Moskva.

Smirnova, Smirnova, Smirnova, Smirnova, Smirnova, Sohail Trever, Ahmad K. O. V., O. O. OQ. O. I. I. I. I. I. Lukonin, Khan, 1963. 1981. 1967. 1971. 1970. 1992. Svodnyi "Numizmaticheskie "Pervye Ocherki Katalog V. G. Nomenclature, 1987. katalog iz monety monet istorii Sasanianskoe s sogdiiskikh iz gorodishcha Sogda, Usrushany", zametki", origin Moskva. and serebro, monet, EV, Pendjikent history EV, 18. Moskva. 20. Moskva. of coins of (materialy Indo-Pakistan 1949-1956), Sub-continent, Moskva. \\slamabad. List of abbreviations

EV MIA Epigrafika Materialy i Vostoka issledovaniia po arkheologii SSSR VKF AN Uz Vestnik Karakalpakskogo Filiala AN UzSSR Illustrations

Coins of Ustrushana and Farghana (according to O. I. Smirnova: Katalog monet ؟‎ gorodishcha Pendjikent (materialy 1949-1956), Moskva, 1963; Svodnyi katalog sogdiiskikh monet, Moskva, 1981) and Tokharistan (according to E. A. Davidovich, Klady drevnikh i srednevekovykh monet Tadjikistana, Moskva, 1979; ع‎ V. Rtveladze, "Rannesrednevekovye monety Chaghaniana s parnym izobrazheniem", Proshloe Srednei Azii, Dushanbe, 1987; A.M. Mandel'shtam and 5. B. Pevzner, "Raboty Kafirniganskogo otriada v 1952-1953 gg.", Trudy Tadzhikskoi arkheologicheskoi expeditsii, MIA, 66, Moskva-Leningrad, 1958).

About the Mutid dynasty of Ispijab appanage rulers (10"early 11" century) By Michael Fedorov

In No. No. ONS 226. 163. Coins Coins Thus Under Newsletter Reverse: Reverse: on of of No. AH the AH 9 396 39(9)-401 coins Ahmad Molchanov Qutb 171 Ispijab an of al-Daula b. article AH Ispijab (Kochnev 'Ali 396 (2002, (Qararakhanid, was and Ispijab (Kochnev 5) published Abi 1995, placed we Mansir. have 214/162-164) 1995, "Mu by suzerain) mention A. 219/226-230) Obverse: 'izz Molchanov al-Dawla and cite: of Mut the about Abt Mu cite: (only, No. vassal 'izz Nasr 162. the without as al-Daula Abii Mut Reverse: Ispijab Mansir Muhammad). (=Ahmad Mut appanage Qutb (vassal). (reverse) III al-Daula rulers b. The Nasr?) Muhammad under word (Qarakhanid (probably Mut the Mut is Samanids placed a (continuation Ahmad nephew above and b. of early the 'Ali, No. on Qarakhanids. obverse), suzerain) central No. 7) known 164. legend, Reverse: and Aba only The Abu from the Mansur Qutb author laqab Mansur fulus al-Daula (reverse) Mu wrote and (vassal). 'izz dirhems al-Daula that and Mut Obverse: examination Abu (continuation of is Ispijab Mansiir placed Muhammad minted Mut. of in on the numismatic obverse) last between / line Mut monuments (above of and 385/995-96 the Abu central and Mansur under and together legend. 404/1013-14\*. Mut Kalimah). with (the information whole But on such reverse). taken person from And did written in not one exist. instance sources The enabled coins the name show him Muhammad "to quite point clearly is out bracketed as many that between the as ten laqab ruling the 'Mu'izz kunia persons Abu al-Daula' from Mansur the Mutid belonged and the family, dynastical not holding to some name the Mut. "Aba Ispijab Which Nasr throne proves Mut" from but conclusively the to early Aba Mansur that 10\* the till the kunia Muhammad first Aba quarter Mansur Mut. of Molchanov the belonged 11" century" placed to the (Molchanov this appanage ruler under ruler 2002, No. of 4). 8: Ispijab, But "Aba in point Manstir Muhammad of fact Muhammad II he b. either Husain. constructed II b. Husain some b. "ruling Mut (a persons" son of from No. the 7) mentioned laqabs, kunias on the and coins titles of belonging Ispijab from to other 385/995-96 Mutids to or 400/1009- attributed some 10. In names 997 AD cited he rose on against the Ispijab the Samanids, coins to the seeking Mutids the without help of sufficient Nasr b. 'Ali, grounds. the Qarakhanid ruler of Mawara'annahr\*. By the way, before the conquest of Bukhara (the capital of the Samanids), in Dha-l-Qa'da 389 / October 999, Nasr b. 'Ali never was the ruler of Mawarannahr.
No. 229. Thus Well, Like The The So Let Abu me alliance dirhems Reverse: other we so Mansir now much have powerful with of Abu tum Abu for Ispijab Muhammad the the Mansur to Manstir vassals Samanids laqab the struck name Mu'izz Mu Mu b. of in 'izz was 'izz al-Husain 389/998-9 the Ahmad al-Daula al-Daula al-Daula shortlived: Samanids, b. Ispijabi mention Nasr. Mut and Mut in the kunia (the and 997 Kochnev not several Ispijab word only Abu Abi Abu Mut Manstir Mansur. rulers Mansitr names became (1995, is were (Masson placed 208, Muhammad free Muhammad But waiting after what Nr. above 1968, 75) being about for b. the Mut. published 240). al-Husain an arrested the central opportunity Which kunia On the a by legend b. Aba coin proves Ilek obverse Mut Nasr to of as Nasr Ispijabi get on AH conclusively and under but rid coin 389 the mutinied retained of the No. Ispijab name them. Kalima 226) that Ahmad Ispijab, against When which and the we - his the laqab his find though reflects Nasr? suzerain vassal Qarakhanid written Mu as another 'izz Mirek vassal and al-Daula (in khaqanate political asked letters (the of the word belonged the as Qarakhanids. situation. Qarakhanid large Mirek arose not as on is the There to placed the some So ruler Kalima eastern the are under of Abi kunia two Uzgend, itself) Nasr frontiers the names Abu last but Aba Ilek Nasr to line of on Nasr. Nasr Aba the the on of weakening the Manstr b. Above the obverse: 'Ali, central coin the for Muhammad of Mut legend). Kalima help. AH Samanid above, 389 The is Ispijab On Mut. latter, the and state, this name Ahmad belonged however, dirhem, the Muhammad. b. ruler minted to Nasr having the of below Qarakhanid, in Under Ispijab come AH the 400 to the changed Samarqand, Kalima. kunia in Ahmad Ispijab, Aba his On b. political Aba Nasr ordered the 'Ali. reverse is Mansir the the orientation. name the arrest Mu'izz last Mut. Samanid of Both In the al-Daula 380/990 names mutineer. amir, Mut 'Abd are the written It al-Malik does seems Qarakhanid in not small b. that mention Nuh, letters. Ilek ruler is cited. Nasr the On of Qarakhanid Balasaghin, considered the I supposed reverse Abu under (Fedorov suzerain Harin Mansitir the (i.e. name Boghra 1972, Muhammad he of 142) posed the Khan, that caliph as Ispijabi the occupied an is Ahmad independent cited capable Amir Ispijab b. Nasr of al-Jalil ruler) thwarting cited without Abii and on resistance had Mansur. his early a plans. Qarakhanid vassal Bartold (Bartold On of his 23 (1963, coins own, 1964, October was Mirek. 336) 507). the 999, established son But Ilek of after Ilek Nasr that the Nasr. death the captured Kochnev kunia of Hardin Abu Bukhara, (1987a, Nasr (in 992. annihilated belonged 158) the shared ruler to the my the of Qarakhanid opinion. Samanid Ispijab again The state ruler second became and of Balasaghin, created coin a vassal of a AH of new 389 Ahmad the Qarakhanid Ispijab Samanids. b. 'Ali. was On dominion Amir struck fuliis al-Jali\] from in of different Mawarannahr Aba 385-386/995-96 Manstr dies (the (Bartold Muhammad die Ispijab citing 1963, Mut (Kochnev the 326, is Samanid the 329). ruler 1987, amir, of 57-59) Ispijab 'Abd Samanid who al-Malik became Nuh b. Nuh a b. vassal Mansur being of obsolete). and the his Qarakhanids. vassal, On the Abd obverse In Mansir this case of Muhammad this there hybrid is a - deviation coin al-Husain, Mut from and are his the cited. Qarakhanid rule The concerning name suzerain Mut the also placing are cited. appears on On the on the coin the reverse, coins. of the The name the last name and Samanid titulage Abu Mansir amir, of the 'Abd Muhammad suzerain al-Malik and is b. those in Nah the is of margin cited. the vassal. This after latter The the words suzerain was put mimma should on the amara, be throne cited which by after conspiring shows the honorific that Samanid he mention possessed generals of Ispijab the in caliph. Safar and had One 389/February the cannot prerogative tell 999 whether and of dethroned striking this deviation coins 14 Dhu-I-Qa'da there. was intended Certainly 389/23 or he not. was October that same 999 by Abu Ilek Manstir Nasr, who Muhammad captured b. Bukhara al-Husain (Bartold b. Mut 1963, Ispijabi 327, mentioned 329). Coins in show the chronicles that for 9 (Bartold months in 1963, 999 the 326). ruler of Ispijab was a vassal of the Samanids. Then during the last one and a half months of 999 he was a vassal of two Qarakhanids: firstly of

Ahmad Thus Under And b. so Molchanov Nasr, No. what 10 then Molchanovy "the constructed of examination Ahmad placed b. "Mu 'Ali. of "Nasr 'izz numismatic As b. al-Dawla Mut compensation (a monuments son Abi of Nasr No. for Mut Ispijab, 9) together mentioned (Ahmad which with III on information went b. dirhams Nasr?) to another dated (probably taken Qarakhanid, AH from 410-414 a written nephew Ahmad (1019-24 sources" of No. b. Nasr 7)" AD) actually from as was a granted two vassal enables Qarakhanids appanage Khojende us to point ruler and (Fedorov out one of Ispijab is Mutid, that 1972, there under which 142), were Qarakhanids". where means not he that 10 minted but an The appanage 8 coins "ruling reader as a ruler having persons vassal of read from of Ispijab Ilek these the Nasr whom lines Mutid in will Molchanov family, 390/999-1000. have holding the impression placed My the supposition under Ispijab that, No. throne yes, 9 that indeed, never from the Qarakhanid existed. on the the early coins 10" Ahmad of till AH the 410-414 b. first Nasr quarter Ispijab was of a the is son written 11" of Ilek century". "Nasr Nasr 6. b. Muf\*. 'Ali was But corroborated it is nothing of by the a kind. fals Only of AH the 411 name Bukhara "Nasr" (Kochnev is written on 1995, the 243/552) coins in question. citing Ahmad It would b. Ilek appear Nasr. that So Molchanov Ahmad b. Nasr promulgated cited on coins the identification of Ispijab was of this a Qarakhanid obscure "Nasr\* and as a "Nasr son of b. Ilek Muf\* Nasr, without the conqueror producing of any Bukhara substantiation. in 999 Ap. I do not know of any grounds for asserting that the Nasr cited on the coins of AH 409, 410, 412 Ispijab was "Nasr 5. Muf\*. As for the coins of AH 413-414 Ispijab, I am not aware of any. In Kochnev's catalogue there are coins of AH 409, 410, 412 Ispijab (Kochnev 1995, 239/501). The coins of AH 413-414 Ispijab are absent, the earliest after AH 412 Ispijab being the coin of AH 416 Ispijab (Kochnev 1995, 249/655). If Molchanov knows of coins of AH 413-414 Ispijab he ought to tell us where they are kept or published. On the obverse of the coins of 409, 410, 412 struck in Ispijab are cited: suzerain Arslan Khan, i.e. the Qarakhanid, Mansir b. 'Ali (Fedorov 2001, 21-22), vassal Nasir al-Daula Atim Tegin, i.e. the Qarakhanid, Ah mab b. Muhammad b. 'Ali (Fedorov 2001, 24), and subvassal, some obscure Nasr. There is no mention of Mut on those coins. And there is no mention that this Nasr was "a son of No. 9", i.e. of some mythical "Mu 'izz al-Dawla Abu Nasr Mut (=Ahmad III - Nasr?) (probably a nephew of No. 7)" who never existed. If Molchanov knows the coins on which Nasr 6. Mut is cited he should let us know. As for Nasr b. Ahmad who, according to Molchanov was the father of Nasr b. Mut, he was, as I have shown above, a Qarakhanid and not a Mutid. By the way Nasr b. Mut means "Nasr son of Mut" so that, according to Molchanov himself, he could not be Nasr b. Ahmad i.e. "Nasr son of Ahmad".

2 4. 3 5 6. 8 9 7. 1 Bartold, Bartold, Fedorov, Fedorov, Kochnev, Kochnev, Kochnev, Masson, Molchanov, V. V. M. M. M. B. B. 8. V. V. E. A. N. N. 2. D. 2. 1964. 1963. 1968. A. 2001. 1972. 1987. 1987a. 1995. 2002. "Bogra-khan", Turkestan "Kladik "Politicheskaiia "The "Klad "Svod "Zametki "The Genealogy mednykh nadpisei dirhemov Mutid v epokhu po srednevekovoi Sochineniia, Dynasty na istoriia monet of kontsa mongol karakhanidskikh Qarakhanids™, X of Karakhanidov X - Ispijab 'skogo nachala - tom nachala numizmatike 2, nashestviia, and ch. XI XI 2, its v v. v. iz iz Sochineniia, kontse Supplement coins Moskva. Tashkentskogo Srednei monetakh: goroda (10" X \[angi-lul Azii. - nachale - antroponimy to early tom Chast' ONS oazisa", Tashkentskoi 1, 11" XI Newsletter Moskva. 8. v. century)", i (Karakhanidy)\*, Novoe (Karakhanidskie titulatura oblasti\*, 168. v sovetskoi ONS (chast' Summer. Newsletter, /storiia, /storiia monety numizmatike 1)", Vostochnoe arkheologiia material kak 171, istoricheskii Spring. i 'noi i numizmaticheskom kul'tury etnografiia istochnik)", istoricheskoe Uzbekistana, Srednei Numizmatika istochnikovedenie muzeevedenii. Azii, 21. Moskva. i Epigrafika, i spetsial Tezisy 10. dokladov 'nye istoricheskie i soobshchenii konferentsii distsipliny, 4, k 200-letiiu Moskva. Otdela Numizmatiki Ermitazha, Leningrad.
The Coinage of Safi I - Some Additions By Stan Goron

In the previous newsletter \| published an article detailing the coinage of the Safavid ruler, Safi I. listing the mints, dates and types that I was aware of at the time of writing. Since then I have been able to note some additional types and dates, which are listed below.

Ardabil 1048, 1048, 1050, 1051, type type type type 2A, 2B, 2A, 2B, reverse reverse reverse reverse \| \| \| \| Iravan Qazvin Hamadan 1044, 1050, 1041, type type type 2A, 2A, 2A, reverse reverse reverse \| \| \| Tiflis Isfahan 1046, 1046, type type 2A, 2A, reverse reverse 2 \| Zegam 1045, type 2A, reverse \|

The Coinage of the Safavid ruler, 'Abbas II up to AH 1060 By Stan Goron

Safi I This died reign in AH was 1052 mostly (1642 peaceful. AD) and There was succeeded were no wars by his of son, any "Abbas significance II. At that his affected succession Persian the new territory. shah In was AH still 1058 a young (1648 AD). boy who 'Abbas had mounted spent his a life successful in the harem, expedition as had become to regain the the norm city with of the Qandahar, heir apparents. a campaign During that the left first a rare part but of significant his reign, government numismatic was legacy. in the He hands died in of AH powerful 1077 (1666 wazirs AD), but at it the was early not long age before of 33, having 'Abbas overindulged gained enough in experience the normal to vices become of the the leading Safavid figure court in at the that government time. and thus did he continue for the rest of his 24 year reign.

The The Coinage coinage During the of this first reign three continued years of to the be reign one of (AH silver 1052-4) struck the in the coinage name continued of the shah, the weight with any standard copper of coinage the former struck reign locally with the under 'abbasi the authority weighing of 7.68 the local ع‎ based authorities on a toman and without of 2000 the nokhod. shah's The name. legend Gold on coins these are coins extremely is similar rare to and that must on the have initial been coinage struck only of his for father presentation and the purposes. same as that This on article the uniform is concerned coinage only of with the the latter silver part coinage. of his grandfather's reign, viz:

## ولايت شاه بندة عباس

'abbas bande-ye shah-e velayat‏ 'Abbas, servant of the king of the Velayat‏

Differentiating In AH 1054 between the weight the coinage standard of was 'Abbas reduced I and to 7.39 "Abbas g based II of this on a type toman is easy of 1925 if the nokhod date is and clear a new but coin otherwise type introduced can be difficult. with a There completely are certain different stylistic couplet differences on the obverse: but one useful one is the inclusion of the names of the 12 rashidun in the margin around the Kalima on the reverses of the coins of "Abbas I, while those of 'Abbas II of this type have only a dotted border. On these coins of "Abbas I usually some part of the margin is visible. This initial type of 'Abbas II is referred to henceforward as type 1 (KM type A).

## صاحيقرانى سكه بكيتى

This The The legend date reverses continued is always of ثانى both until عباس on types the the حو obverse of end 'abbdsi توفيئ of the but از have reign its زد position the though Shiite varies. from formula On the years coins (Kalima) of 1067/8 type within 2 onwards it a is be-giti dotted often a sekke-ye larger positioned border. coin, sahebgerani‏ As centre the with 5 right the shahi, coins for replaced years of Safi 1054- the I described 1064, 'abbasi. while This in the on article zad previous later as stops toufig-e coins newsletter, at the it haqq is year usually 'abbas-e there 1060; are lower later thani‏ two years left. varieties There are mostly of are, the covered however, formula. In the world, satisfactorily various one 'Abbas with exceptions muhammad the by second, the to KM this. by rasiil the listings. The favour allah, style This of of the God, engraving latter other, struck type with also the‏ of varies "Abbas muhammad with II is later referred nabi coins allah. to tending Sahebgerani henceforward Of the to be first coin‏ as struck type variety, on 2 (KM wider there types flans are B with two and &). more arrangements: of the legend one where visible. the There divider is between considerable the first consistency two lines in is engraving formed by styles the elongated between tail the of various the letter mints. ya of which 'Ali suggsts The second that dies layout may has have the been divider produced formed centrally by an and elongated sent out to version the mints, of or Muhammad. else very carefully There is copied a distinctive from a sub-variety centrally produced of the lattermost template. Tiflis, which however, has a mint-mark is a notable in the exception shape of here a bud, as and many which of its occurs coins on of type the coins 2 have of a a number much cruder of the mints. style. The same applies to the single coin of Zegam that has so far been noted. Reverse 4 (Nabi type) Reverse 2 (Muhammad type)

(note: for reverse 3 see the Khuzestan 2 shahi listing)

At most mints, the 'abbdst was by far the most predominant denomination; one and two sha@hi coins are very scarce to rare, especially for type 1. An exception to this is the continuing striking of 2 sha@hi coins at the Khuzestan mints of Huwaiza, Dauraq. Dezftil and Ramhormuz, the last being very scarce. These coins are found with both obverse legends depending on year of striking, with the couplet in the margin around the cartouche with the mint/date information; the reverse usually has the Shiite formula starting in the margin with the central legend containing the phrase 'ali wali allah.

The Mints Coins of type \| are known struck at the following mints: The Ardabil, number Ganja, of mints Hamadan, that struck Iravan, coins Isfahan, during Mashhad, the first half Nimriz, of the reign Qazvin, of Rasht, "Abbas Shimakhi, 11 is similar Tabriz, to that Tiflis of his and father; a mint thereafter, that has been the number reduces so that the vast majority of the coins were struck at the mints in the north-west of the country.
# Po

read as Dadiyan. Some of these are known from only a few coins Isfahan and some of the mints for this type have come to light only recently.

Coins For most of of type the coin 2 are types known listed below, struck only at Ardabil, the obverses Ganja, are shown. Hamadan, Information Herat, Iravan, is provided Isfahan, for Kashan, each mint Mashhad, and year Qandahar. regarding the Qazvin, reverses Rasht, so far Shimakhi, noted. Shishtar, Tabriz, Tiflis, Urdii and Zegam. Hert is so far reported from a single example so far. as is Zegam, while coins of Qandahar, Qazvin and Urdi are also rare. Type 1 - Veldyat type Ardabil

Isfahan coins of 1052 seem to be rare; those of 1053 are scarce. Mashhad

# Pt‏ 2 ا EC‏ 1 لا 11 ال الا 1454\| 1 \]#1 طخ لخ اط

Only one coin of 1052 noted so far, and none for 1053. The 4 coins are now relatively common, though, having come to light only recently. Nimriiz

# a‏ \| الاااا الا 1054\| خط شط اا

Known from one example only, in the Tibingen University collection. The last digit of the date looks more like a "6" but could be an oddly engraved "4".

Only three coins noted so far for type \| coins of this mint lravan Only five coins noted so far for this mint. Rasht
## Three coins only noted for this mint so far. The 1054 coin is in the Tibingen University collection. Shimakhi

The coins of 1052 have the date at the bottom: those of 1053. at the top. Only one coin of 1052 noted so far, in the Tiibingen University Collection. The coins of 1053 have the mint-name engraved with the kAi placed before the shimd, and are very difficult to find with clear date.

Some coins have a rather garbled last digit which may be a 3 reingraved to a 4. Coins of this mint are now relatively common.

These The crudely type 2 engraved coins and coins the Khuzestan are stylistically types will very be different listed in from the other next newsletter. type 1 coins. They are only known for the one year and from a few specimens. Dadiyan is located to the east of Erzurum in eastern Turkey, not far from the modern Iranian border.

A few more rare Indian Ancient Coins By Bob Senior

83 This Abdagases The would obverse appear II silver of to the drachm confirm coin is 2.80 the in the gm. legend same In ISCH of beautiful the I published original and finely coin this issue though engraved as the 234.3D, style final of epithet a the unique earlier is corruptly drachm die with spelt. which the hair seemed depicted to bear by tiny the additional annulets. On epithet the reverse NIKIOY the archer's meaning seat 'victorious'. is shown as This a cross second with example balled ends has - now a feature surfaced that and does it bears not the appear legend; on regular Parthian coins until BAZIAEQE around AD 40 \[BAZ\]JIAEQ\[N\] - 50. \[MET\]AAOY ABAATAZOY ETI@ANOY® AIKAIOY NEIKI

84 Azilises square 10mm x 15mm 2 1.54 gm. ISCH issues 46 49 with Elephant/Bull types are all scarce or rare and the fact that most have blundered legends suggests that they are locally struck Hazaran issues. There does not seem to be a standard weight for the group but until now they all seem to have been 'units' with no fractions. This new coin struck from small dies seems to be a 1/4 unit and of issue 49. The obverse letter is a retrograde Kharosthi Bu and would have the catalogue number 49.4b.

85 Issue Parata 298.1H Raja in Na-- ISCH Hemidrachm was unique 1.42 gm. and the Brahmi legend uncertain, but now a second specimen from the same dies has surfaced which allows one to complete the inscription;

# es TYAIoUTd se IW

The letters Du are mara corrupt Pu trara but an sa? attempted Parada reading raja? is: Naxx ya One would expect Putrasa and may be the two ''letters' between tra and Pa represent Sa? The two characters of the Raja's name after Na are uncertain and the Ya may even be the start of the father's name. Tentatively \| would read Na x x ya, Parataraja, son of Dumara. A Brahmi scholar may give a better reading!
86 Parata Raja Round, 23mm dia. 4 7.50 gm This remarkable coin is approximately double the weight of any previously known Parataraja copper coin and bears a unique portrait. The bust of the Raja with moustache is shown facing left holding three flowers in his left hand. Whereas the Parataraja coins with Kharosthi legends may date from the first century BC, some of these later Parataraja coins with Brahmi legends appear to date from a much later period. The only similar obverses to this coin are found on late Indo-Parthian coins such as 272.3 and 273.5, which were probably inspired by the Soter Megas large coppers with heroic busts (B16.1 on Vol. II, p. 221). The closest image is however the 'Farn-Sasan' coin 276.2T. The legend is not complete and the Brahmi (?) forms not quite intelligible:

# لطا ز VAP pres...‏

87 This Kavhasavhame fairly good silver Parataraja? drachm Drachm has a 3.00 right-facing gm bust and Kharosthi letter style not far removed from that of issue 280.3D in the name of Spajhana, son of Bhagavhanama. The legend on this coin however appears thus:

# PRIN) bY PPPS

The tails The on legend the first begins four Kuvhusu letter suggest (or Kavhasa) -u endings and to then the syllables Vhume. but Whether I am not this sure is the if they whole are name not in or fact the just last decorative. two characters some form of title I am not sure. Then comes, albeit in slightly distorted forms, Parata, the dynastic name. There is no patronymic as on other Parataraja coins and so one would expect simply Rajasa for the end of the legend. The first letter could easily be Ra though it looks more like Va and the last letter is most likely a Sa, though the top is unclear and it could be a Ja, but the middle letter definitely does not resemble a Ja. It looks more like Bha though the top is unclear. An engraver's error?

88 Miratahrima Parataraja Drachm 3.48 gm In Newsletter 170.م‎ 16 I published the drachm 14 above which \|

suggested had a similar legend to issue 297.1D in ISCH. This third specimen has surfaced which shares the obverse die with 14 and the reverse die with 297.1D (which has a crude left-facing obverse bust). We can now resurrect the entire Brahmi legend:

# كا له \[716398/518ي 507380

The letters in the top line show where they differ on the reverse of coin 14 from the other two.

Galata Print Ltd, Old White Lion, Llanfyllin, Powys SY22

The initial letter is unusual and Hma or Hri are my best guesses. Then comes - ramira Putrasa Paratarajasa Mirata then another funny letter Hma/Hri again? The legend ends with Sa though on 14 the letter seems more complicated. If the names are Hmaramira and Miratahma then they are not so far in sound from the Miramara and Maramira of issue 295 in ISCH.

89 This 'Napki tiny copper Malka' in 4 perfect 0.44 gm condition 13mm seems to be unique. The reverse depicts a bearded human face with a smile on its lips and possibly horns on its head. The obverse is in the style of Gébl 198.

A Note on the Copper Mint in Garhwal By Nick Rhodes.

In ONS "Previous Newsletter to the No.166 Gorkhali (Winter conquest 2001), of pp.17-18, Garhwal the I wrote copper an article mines of entitled Nagpur "A are Garhwal said to Takka have yielded Struck Rs.5,000 in the Name Gk. of a the year, East or India about Company". Rs.3,800 of At our the money. time of The writing entire that mineral article, revenue I had not of consulted Kumaon and the book Garhwal, by E.T.Atkinson, including mint Geology dues on of the the Himalayas'. coinage of On copper p.274 pice, of had this fallen book I to found Rs.4,800 an interesting Gk, equivalent passage, to Rs.3,600 relevent to of my British above currency. article: This was mainly due to the neglect of the Gorkhali Government, under which the mines had fallen in and become choked with rubbish. Their suspicious policy prevented them from trusting their own officers, whilst their want of probity precluded any private person from venturing to sink the capital necessary to re-open the mines."

A note is added the "These mint dues were collected for a few years under British rule at the mines of Dhanpur and Gangoli, and at one-half per cent. yielded a revenue of Rs.300 a year. To Board, dated 6" August, 1821." This confirms the conclusions of my article, when I concluded that the copper coinage struck by private contractors near the mines, must have continued under the existing arrangements for a short time after 1815, when the British took over the administration of Garhwal after the Nepal War. The contractors operating the mines at Dhanpur and Gangoli merely substituted the name of the Angrezi Kampani for name of Maharaja Girvan Yuddha of Nepal. The reducing revenue from the mint dues during and immediately after the Nepalese occupation of Garhwal, explains the relative scarcity of the copper coins struck during this period.

2. \|. Originally \| have not come published across in this 1882, abbreviation as part of The for a Himalayan type of rupee Districts before. of the North However, Western this presumably Provinces of represents India, reprinted the value under of four the of above the local title by Cosmo Garhwali Publication, Timashas or New Quarter Delhi, rupees, 1980. which circulated at the rate of around five to the British-Indian rupee.

© Oriental Numismatic reg! 2003 -\_- BX. e-mail: Paul@ galata.co.uk --- Supplement to ONS Newsletter 177

## A New Chinese Publication on the Currency of Tibet

Review with Notes and Comments by Wolfgang Bertsch

The following Tsering Xi Scott The I It The Regarding hope is Zang following book an Semans that Pincuo important Zi marvellous the under Zhi my (e-mail: illustrations, four (Chinese comments Ou review colour-illustrated forged Qian colour-illustrated ssemans@aol.com) transcription is Bi or it and in may dubious Xue Chinese. notes be Hui volume noted of coins will book \[Tibet Only Tibetan is that contribute on was are offering the autonomous the in apparently published Tshe-ring the table coinage first to this of a region Phun-tshogs), in publication better contents and illustrated part China paper where numismatic understanding in and money as 2002: coins for the genuine now US preface are of society\]: 5 Tibet. illustrated, retired, 150 specimens: of plus are The the Zhong translated was postage. introductory numerous many Guo \|. director a images The Xi silver into Zang plates price part English. of sho of Qian the copper gives may of found Numismatic The Dao Bi seem a coins historical \[Chinese table in Guang, steep. are this of Tibet's Resarch but publication, contents survey year too the dark 8 (p. Money\]. of book Department is and 72, also Tibet's since hardly is nr. given a Main 1-96), must these currency any of in the authors: for the Tibetan. have details Lhasa every Tibetan and only can Zhu Branch includes collector captions be word Jin appreciated. of "eight" Zhong chapters or in the student Chinese People's being \[Chief The on of spelt and selection the Bank Tibetan editor\]. often with coin of China. Wang currency. are minting a of reversed not coins Zhu Hai sufficient. and has letter Jin Yan, banknote many Zhong "rgya". Wang lacunae is printing 2. Dui a member A half \[dbang which techniques. sho of could 'dus\], the of Dao same Apart have and Guang, department, Tsering been from dated the filled Pincuo. year plates while by \| ISBN Wang on (p. inserting coins 74, 7-101-03360-1/Z Hai nr. (a illustrations Yan Jia 1-103; Qin is could not silver part. from 449, also sho, of year be Beijing, published it, considered but 2 is is 2002 published known numismatic (491 as a as for + phantasy). 6 the the + literature. 8 author first pages 3. time of A + 6 various in silver Major maps). China 20 varieties articles \[p. tam 69, srang, nr. on have 1-90\]; dated Tibetan hardly a 15-54 1 6 coins. been srang (p. considered; 100, The pattern nr. first \[p. l-197a). two 124, particularly authors nr. 4. A 1-285\], copper had the a previously ten (brass) tam 2 pattern 1/2 published skar, \[p. dated 119, 15-53 various nr. (p. 1-269\] 117, articles and nr. 1-262). a (mainly "tam srang" in pattern China Numismatics, without exact Zhong-guo value are published Qian-bi) and for the the first following time) book: and paper Zhu Jingzhong, money, the Ci book Ren includes Ping Cuo numerous & Yan Lunzhang: colour plates /ntroduction illustrating to the material Tibetan from Regional the former Currency Tibetan (Yuan Government Xi Zhang Mint Di Fang such as Qian wood Bi Gai and Kuang), metal printing Institute blocks for Financial for paper Affairs money, of the coin People's and metal Bank of weights China in in srang Tibet, and Lhasa, tola, 1988. scales, coin dies (among these a pair of dies for a 72 srang pattern coin which is unknown \[p.207, nr. 359 and 3-60\]), photographs of a coin-press and a laminating machine. Most of this material has never been published before. Also included are photographs of former mint buildings and of several seals, not all of these related to the mint (e.g. one seal from Sakya \[p.458, nr. 8-6\]).

Gaden The tangka main is value only of presented the book with is to very be few found specimens in the illustrations although the of authors items which find luckily space survived to illustrate in the three Tibetan identical mint: pattern double coins. tangkas coin.ممه‎ dies, 82. banknote That the printing authors blocks, are neglecting coin and major metal weights coin varieties and other cannot objects be attributed from the to mint lack are of all space presented or restrictions as clear colour imposed reproductions by the publisher, and include since they numerous are very highly generous interesting with space items on which the have plates never on which been many published more before, illustrations thus giving of coins a could fascinating have been insight fitted into without 20th increasing century the coin number and \_ of banknote pages. The production reason in for Tibet. this omission must be that the collection of Tibetan coins of the Lhasa Branch of the People's Bank of China was probably not formed in as systematic and expert a manner as would have been desirable.

Specific p. p. p. p. p. p..م p..م 62. 69: 65: 58: 70: 54-55::64 5::59-60 Comments The 1-70 Rare Rare The 1-91 Qian The Nr. statement weight second specimen "dza"-tangka Rare Long and authors 1-61 zho explanations of year 4 and of issue "that this zho, do of Karl 1-62 variety not coin Jia of dated the Gabrisch. Shri the include Qing, which weight with to 6th Mangalam similar the year double an is used presented 58th illustration of to circle in Jia tangkas the year Tibet Qing. specimen as on is of being from‏ most‏ both was The the Kuping sides the probably Saha very reverse in the collection rare, coin similar collection with weight, a is which forgery not the to of the given. showing Tibetan of Karl was specimen Nicholas or the Gabrisch. Maybe fantasy, legend that most in Rhodes, it the widely the is has Karl which struck Tibet Kunsthistorisches 2 Gabrisch but zho used can from mint struck weight? be in the adopted Tibet, had compared from same presented Museum i.e. a the die different that to as same the‏ his‏ the of of weight specimens pair Pratap Vienna. book of Geld Simha dies. as Another the illustrated aus central (with Tibet, specimen seperate on government" Winterthur pp. 72 petals exists and 1990, represents on 74.‏ in reverse). to the Cering collection only Only Pincuo half fractions the of during‏ truth, Karl of and this Gabrisch his coin visit is typical are (see to to Lhasa also for be the found comment in biased August on pp. to view seal 148-151. 1995. of nr. many 8-4, It is p. Chinese surprising, 457). authors that who the‏ write compilers on Tibetan of the numismatics. book under The discussion tola weights did illustrated not include‏ on pp. 421-427 reproductions clearly of show other that coins the illustrated Tibetan government in the Gabrisch was using book‏ weight which are standards apparently of Chinese missing and in Indian the Chinese origin collections concurrently (mainly‏ in the same that of way the as People's it used Bank the "srang" of China) and which "tangka" were (tam) available currency to them;‏ units which e.g. Gabrisch are of Chinese nr. 48 (zho and Indian of Jia origin Qing, year respectively. 4), nr. 49 (zho of Jia‏ Qing, year 5), nr. 90 (undated 10 tam pattern in the style of the‏ first "monk" tangka), nr. 97 (one srang, dated 15-48), nr. 109, (10‏ tam pattern with reverse like nr. 1-269, p. 119), nrs. 142 and 143‏ (two zho-gang patterns) and nr. 147 (Lukuan rupee).‏
specimen p..م p. p. p..م p. pp. pp..م.م p. p. p..م p. p..م p. 72: 74: 77::78 88::101:86 107: 109: 118::117:100 119: 102: 123: 78-79: 124 98-99: 95-97: from Half 1-96 1-113 1-116 Strange No 1-144 1-266 1-221 1-262 1-197a 1-231 1-269 This Nrs. 1-197b: 1-202 A the zho Coin specimen Half The and to reproduction 1-296 The pattern Seems Rare This It This Halpert forgery This This that zho 1-118 The nrs. is later 1-114 authors not zho-gang 10 % the to of of is five date to 1-178 Jia the Only 1% or Gaden zho a mentioned tam The collection 1-298 be 5 Chinese zho fantasy is of Qing, do skar srang an \| and authors pattern pattern one given the srang not struck dated unissued The tangka copper 1-186 2'2 most major coin seem (srang (now forgery that as dated compilers do is with skar from 15-52, probably 1921 not dated show this not to varieties coin zho-gang, variety in (Y gang 15-52 reverse know metal of known seem 2/6 the (= looks to how 16.1), with the illustrate the 15-55), skar of collection a is zho the like to forgery which 15-54 difficult illustrated.‏ from in dated this Norbu as first dated know rare coin Inga) brass Gaden‏ if early‏ but year other three gold‏ type it 16-1 or the 15- is are on of it is is it is‏ a‏ obverse Gaden tangka Nicholas fantasy. of reverse illustrated According is 51 coin, seems made with probably modern which sources. published specimens to Dao (1917) find "Lion struck of tangka has style, (1-153 to Guang. The forgery variety It Rhodes)'. these very a are is the to for may looking me of forgery, in missing. Tibetan published very my is base the silver'.‏ to reverse common the A without of that be illustrated 1-154) experience similar 3 few Lhasa considered backwards" silver first but, zho word The the legend - coins for major is the as time, coins origin, coin and, specimen coin indicated (lotus "eight" such, the group the separated in with scarce a as for but which first fine is mule date something with such, much is this of this dated is as is or spelt time, varieties 15-52 three between three share type more already known better date is by scarcer not with flowers, 15-54, but which dots stems). of can is common similar condition. are known zho-gang. much from pattern known a known than be above reversed missing. compilers although considered similar 1-116 the scarcer obverse the (scale from from 1-270 from the Halpert genuine is letter to other date, 3 than‏ who‏ the‏ the‏ the and and the‏ on the as collection the "brgya". collection'. neither scarce one reproduction the sources. coins spent reverse another collection reverse date scale of of years variety the the of this 15-53 dies; 10 While of rarest of reverse of the tam date. rarity in is Alexander with they for Alexander not the later Lhasa pattern Tibetan this variety solid which very weight seem zho-gang type.‏ should illustrated clear. Lissanevitch.‏ buds copper with goes to of Lissanevitch on 4.80 be inverted know. illustrated coins. from obverse.‏ unaware ع‎ by recorded \| Gabrisch, The emblems. to and on 10, of Chinese pp. for another the 1 op.cit, being this 121-122. major and coin Nepalese‏ as the obverse Tibetan‏ nr. must rarest Could 109 be collection.‏ coins) compilers also (p. incorrect, 93, be than plate a mule only the 25). its between 74 denomination indicate skar the (1-150-1-152) that early is this correctly and coin the and later is given the made copper 2/6 as "5 skar from zho-gang. fen" (1-156 brass. in the to lt‏ Chinese -158) appeared which caption. in the are indicated late A half 1990s zho as in scale the coin, Lhasa 2. apparently According market, to struck mostly my experience from struck the in‏ same these copper, dies coins and is are known was equally also from sold scarce, the in Halpert a but metal not collection'. which rare. looks like silver.‏ انم

(cloud p. p. pp. "After p..م In For "With line a 136: 137: 133::140 137- Chinese the the either truly 1-336 1-333 1-322 1-344 minting 140: peaceful Chinese ending article® Nrs. This Seems This This and liberation 1-335 50 in 5 the 25 to ingenuity, introduction srang zho a be background small srang to coin a of 1-344 pattern, zho-gang Tibet, cloud pattern the seems (for into Communists members dated or to dies to the struck the in Tibet a be AD design of planned short an of the of in 1951, the unknown devised 25 horizontal the copper of issue People's and which struck Yuan 50 of is‏ a srang 25 published Liberation was in line variety Shih-kai special copper, and on erased patterns 50 the currency which dollar for Army is srang right and published the see is the and in end coins, operation first missing pp. the new Communist \[see time.‏ 221-222, for the 1950s value my one the to patterns finance figs first figure srang nrs. one Party 1 time. 3-140 of may and 2/5 officials this in which the 2\]) (= to refer formidable 3-146). 24 date and went are ١ to srang) reverse illustrated of to the its Tibet. project engraved. following reverse: varieties Out here, \[the of consideration (four is Probably passage Sichuan 16-2 given: instead varieties by - issued Lhasa Sylvain of for of 16-2X. as Tibetan highway, the token Mangeot, conch customs by built symbol a shop The in they the or \[see Adventure early government brought my figs 1950s\]. of many 3 a - enterprise. 6\[( All Manchurian. Yuan Tibetans, Shihkai and The dollars Story particularly of with Lobsang them. Khambas, Since Thondup. set the great Yuan Collins, store Shih-kai London, by silver dollars 1974, in any had pp. a form. 104- high silver The 105°: Chinese content therefore Grva-bzhi methodically Las-khungs had collected the intention all silver of sacrificial reminting these vessels dollars, and religious after adding ornaments copper, in as China Tibetan proper coins and in order in the to border make a good provinces profit. for The melting Grva-bzhi down Las-khungs into bullion. sent They the following set up a report mint in to the Chengtu, Tibetan on regional the Chinese government: side of 'Recently the border, the Chinese where faithful soldiers (People's replicas of Liberation the popular Army) 'Republican' have been bringing dollar were many turned Yuan Shih-kai out in dollars large quantities. to Tibet. We Besides could supplying get some profit the currency out of these. of the The high-way method we labour propose force, is these that we heavy, buy the picturesque Yuan Shih-kai coins dollars came.... in useful Presently, for according financing to trade the between quantity Tibet of the and circulating India and Yuan in buying Shih-kai the dollars, goodwe will could of selected mint two Tibetan different aristocrats, silver lamas coins with and two merchants." coin presses, one having the weight of 7 qian (zho) and the denomination of 50 srang and another weighing 3.5 qian with the denomination of 25 srang... If the minting goes smoothly both machines could mint 500 pieces per day. There is no doubt that we could get a big profit out of this. (Authors' note: The reminting of the Yuan Shih-kai dollars could reap a profit of 200 - 300%. The market value of the Yuan Shih-kai dollars was 15 srang. Apart from mixing the silver with copper Grva-bzhi Las-khungs wanted to increase the face value of the new 7 qian coins to 50 srang. We can easily calculate how high the profit would have been). We are in favour of the population and traders. The monasteries and other members of the population do not want to keep the Yuan Shih-kai dollars and they prefer to exchange these into our paper currency or into 10 srang silver coins. The minting of the new coins will be favourable to the circulation of currency." In order to go ahead with its plans, the Grva-bzhi Las-khungs had already taken some measures. According to the accounting books it had bought 263,427 pieces of Yuan Shih-kai dollars between 1951 and 1952 and had spent 3,951,405 srang (1 dollar = 15 srang) for them. Later on, out of fear of being criticised by the central government the plans were not realized."

Already in 1934 a considerable number of dayan silver dollars had entered Tibet with the condolence mission headed by
Huang For pp. pp. "Finally p. p. The Nrs. pp. p. p.223: Mu-sung: 2-2: 2-3: 2-8: 2-4 2-9: 2-10 2-12: 2-13 2-15 2-16 200: 192: 201: 189-195: illustrations 182-184: 223-225: master 3-30 to Dode General Main Office 3-147 2-7 las Laskhung and and Man-powered Nr. Metal-laminating nrs. Interior 2-6: he khungs). and Luo 2-27: 2-11: 2-14: 3-21 2-1 south dies ('dog-sde \[Huang This Various building and Nr. view 3-31 of Dui door Shol-mint and This Workshops Machine for 3-148 two group entrance 3-149 (gser-khang) of Pair of 3-22 buildings Mu-sung\] the screw-press obverse or of Yuan Dode Trabshi These (rolling) rdo-sde, of Trabshi of to zho-gang Pair base (sde-dpal of Nepalese Shih-kai dies nr. (factory Mint Trabshi die of are of Laskhung went 3-158 Gold-Mint Laskhung dies for these machine weighing the for obverse dies mint) dollars, buildings) an Dode three silver Laskhung for to two The unknown nrs. each a below and srang Mint 60 spelling zho-gang coins fact see 3-21 tons? of reverse of (grva-bshi pp. the that silver should Trabshi pattern the and varieties Potala. 168-69 pattern several great coins dies 3-22 be of monasteries (nrs. placed are which were of obverse looks 1/2 an given tam 1-472 probably somewhat unknown together is and srang by known and around reverse Gabrisch' the sent 1-473). with pattern like designs from Lhasa from dies the a pattern of other; western of England; and the of 7: the which again group proper die. 5 srang srang collections the Some distributed of are spelling, reverse dated Nepalese copper inspired of the rab and substantial master coin however, mountains coins by lo illustrated have 927 the die illustrated 20 gifts: survived is (= must in more srang AD for the by be example, on likely Gabrisch, the background gold indicates 1953). pp. one coin. dog-bde 46-55. Another illustrated each that p. The are 106, of at as dies reverse hardly the least plate can on illustrated roughly p. the be 38, visible die 196 coins seen nr. of 20,000 as this 143. while as on dated nr. nrs. pattern the One 3-2. monks several 3-2 rab-lo document of The and is the in illustrated mountains dies 927 the reverse 3-3 Three illustrated nrs. (AD on p. dies 3-21 on 1953) are Seats 196 p. was clearly and on 233, could were was re- p. 3given 437)'° engraved 22 seen nr. officially be the 3-198. and on two Valley master the the in Chinese released reverse order obverses near dies to the silver master for for change Mint of the circulation. dollars the die area. former. the issued nr. (dayan) figure 3-2 The coins A "one" were as German reverse alms\*." and previously of the on die, collector, date die however, illustrated to nr. "four™ Klaus 3-28. is and by missing However, Bronny, Cao the denomination Gang"". the recently the denomination caption acquired "zho-gang" does 0/5. a not 5 srang mention to ~zho coin Inga" that which nr. and 2-27 looks is illustrated is very a pattern much on the die. as if previous having page entered 199 as circulation. nr. 3-20. Also The one issue of of the this obverse coin dies was had probably its central suspended part re-engraved shortly after with reverse a lion dies of with more the Tibetan date rab-lo style and 928 (AD must 1954) have had been been lost prepared as there (see is no nrs. illustration 3-156 to 3-158), of it in as the no book. coins The are 5 known zho patterns which struck bear the from date these rab-lo re-engraved 928. The dies four are known specimens from of the the collections 5 srang coin of illustrated N. G. Rhodes on p. (ex 140 C. (nrs. Valdettaro) 1-345 to and 1-348) A. Lissanevitch all bear the date and rab-lo were first 927: published so do all by the N. specimens G. Rhodes!''. which A third specimen is illustrated as nr. 1-271 on p. 120.

are known p. p. pp. pp. pp..م p. p. p. The pp..م p. pp. pp. pp.:240 242-243: 447: 254::316 434: 317 435: 410-418 225-231 239-317: 270-71: 330-331: 336: legends 380-381: from Nr. Nr. Woodblock 7-43 Woodblock These The Unfortunately western 4-2 4-17 Nrs. Nrs. and This These and The This Tibetan The Unissued are This black 4-4 4-40 p. is banknote is collecticns obverse coin for artist's a 234: for a and woodblock gold to seals text very the the the 4-43 or 4-5 A 25 ingot, obverse printing obverse design precious on obverse printing of scarce huge Wood and Woodblocks tam the this shows similar published selection 100 50 for note block of of document blocks of blocks metal tam srang an an this the that to with for unissued unissued note, for those of weights for second (nrs. sources. the 100 notes, the dies an the the reads legend dated tam early 4-1 described unissued starting 25 25 25 for "monk legend are srang to "bde blue‏ T.E. tam tam‏ tam and the all 4second or note. the with 120) note, note, note probably 10 1677 dated tangka", mkhar purple tam black has The have the dated without dated to "monk note. ba'i been 50 obverse ga-series, struck seal printed the never T.E. T.E. khongs" tam The the printed Tibetan were tangka". in 1672 notes imprint block been block 1673 from 1953/54. printed were which reversed. (AD confirms "water 4-41 (AD published nr. the Some of printed 4-4 1926). a with neans was block The 1927). second rat" of is that probably only of upper the seperately. "Dekhar before. The year, illustrated The the the red dies one text design first later seal. which face intended It block have district". is type is not The type on of is corresponds surprising the for the of accompanied very p. without legend for inscription The the all 316. matching‏ printing close 50,000 blocks‏ literal One was and gap to to "rablo dated afier fortunate notes printed the pattern by should A.D. the meaning the background actual the of 1659 1948. 927° ornamental note note with word 100 that of were coin. (AD tam that is a "bde-khar" such "dgu" illustrated woodblock on altered srang. the Only 1953) a scrolls which great at same the some The or from is on number which "rablo the left like or "happy black p. of blocks similar end main 380.‏ the the precede 928" of seal of palace". one design blocks eight dated the blocks may (1954) shown second and Buddhist 1658 be has was for follow which made survived. as to line by the nr. be replacing of emblems of must central each 4-18 script. printed metal be of (later part and the‏ the the by on years Tibetan may in the two of the the the block text reverse have when obverse production syllable lines illustrated been this are and on inserted tangka "brgyad" different, the period the as block 4-43. main was into by when particularly struck. design the dated "dgu" woodblock. huge These of 1673 (See the numbers the left and reverse Tibetan southwest It end illustrated must of of as dates notes the be well emblem the are second‏ on as were one not the the visible line which printed, two previous (endless of blocks text Snorrason on metal knot). page. on the for the book's blocks The printing block).‏ and two illustrations, Narbeth may the blocks have background identify on been but pp. two as used 316-17 of seal dies red instead) 3T show which flowers which and that clearly were was the the show exclusively black Tibetan used from these seals government 1941 dates from used onwards metal for were the seriously published blocks 100 to print tam as considered srang illustrated previously the 10 notes"\*. srang issuing on in notes. pp. a Chinese 454-55. new 25 article tam by notes Ciren in the Ping same Cuo year and Zhu as the Jinzhong multicoloured who are 50 also tam co-authors notes were of the issed book (1926). under review''. The total number of tangkas struck from these (and maybe other) dies is 331,292 according to this article.
less by than "After The The pp. pp. The pp. The Rinchen 454-455: 444-445: 27 seal weight Tibetan only 456-462: a tolas. lot illustrated seals Dolma of of These inscription These paper 310 which Although g two on Taring, given brass currency can seals p. above 456 be nearly labels for for attributed Daughter had (nr. the the \[100 were illustrated been 8-3) all seals srang illustrated probably could printed with can notes of be ingot certainty also Tibet, are Tsarong translated attached dated is be seals slightly Allied related to said T.E. are the to as sealed 1688 "Newly Tibetan to accompanied that Publishers the this which coin finance finance made was bags Private corresponds not department by in department (or good the the boxes) Ltd. water Chinese for indian the or to before are horse to country AD nrs. caption some Reprint, they year 8-9 1942, and other lefi and "Zha of suggested New the 8-10 providing government the Xi mint. 16th (p. Delhi Ji that 459). They Guan cycle, important we 1978, office. Seal are should Yong year pp. all nr. It evidence inscribed 8-9 is Zhang" 1688, have 107-08: a (the stunning a 100 gold one for ("Tashi with note the below reserve. example the dating of \[standing following: on So silver of the of every Tibetan the illustration tam." for gra-bzhi 100 year grva-bshi metal srang three This showing dngul work. notes. hundred also las par The both The provides khungs\| khang/zho small handle seal seals) S-I slabs definite has and Office is Inga the the the of srang one confirmation Tibetan shaft Seal"), gold, which 2000. are each most inscription: made Snorrason Translation: weighing that of them from the dngul Tibetan and seem twenty-seven gilded "Trabzhi Narbeth par to Era iron be las (T.E.) unrelated Mint identify in dam to/as, open-work and years which were to Printing as as the seal could found put Tibetan technique. type House. away on be 3.115 Tibetan mint loosely in 5 zho The the or It srang is banknotes translated handle treasury. Poiala. mainly 2000". is This characterised Unfortunately as adorned have gold "treasury One to was can with be imported deduce office by converted the four the authors seal", two from of from the into groups this supposing India do eight western inscription not of - along Buddhist three attempt that years with dots dngul that to by auspicious which silver the read is adding short bags and are the most used 254. for emblems seals copper dngul-khang probably in The and the for (bkra to only centre the translate contained shis water mint (bank of brtags their the - horse or because 5 dorje inscriptions. treasury), zho brgyad) year copper design our during on par own coins either in for the the mining at par-khang side. lower 16th the On value was cycle border. each not (printing of which of 2000 well The the srang earlier comprises house, four developped." sides (i.e. seals banknote 4000 the of of the years this coins). shaft section) type between one have and can AD two /as see 1927 groups one tor to /as-khungs of of 1986, the three four is AD dashes (office). mythological 1942. instead. The According inscription animals which of to the my are seal records, considered imprint this is to seal in 'phags-pa be was the introduced guardians (also called of during the hor four vig, the issue Mongolian directions. of the script) Starting zha-series, and with is the very the note illustration similar in my to collection the above legend on with found the the left. lowest on the the serial seal's following number shaft: animals dngul bearing par are this / represented: las seal tham, being the tiger zha word 08588. (stag), tham, I dragon had being tentatively another ('brug). dated form lion (seng-ge) for the dam, notes meaning and of the garuda zha-series "seal". (khyung). to 1945'°. It should This be new noted evidence. that the however, eight auspicious may mean emblems that one are has not to only date these found notes as major to AD design 1942 or elements 1943 at on the latest. Tibetan coins, but also on the obverse of the multicoloured 50 tam notes. On the reverse of these notes the four mythological animals just mentioned are shown (see pp.

330-31, The Seal Seal The nrs. three 8-6 three nr. 5-7a (p. 8-4 columns seals and 458) (p. 5-7b). 457) illustrated is of from 'phags-pa has Sakya the on same pp. (sa-skya) script 460 vartu-script on (nrs. and the 8-11 seal's its character imprint to imprint 8-13) is can known "dza" are be undoubtedly transcribed above from an the illustration private two as follows: columns seals given bsil and by of Idan/ Dieter 'phags-pa are chos therefore Schuh srid/ (seal)-script in lhun unrelated Grundlagen 'grub. as to A a translation larger Tibetischer any government seal of word Siegelkunde. the second office. by word Demo-regent They Eine is: are "Cool Untersuchung inscribed (1811-19), possessing, with iiber illustrated the religion following tibetische and by Siegelaufschriften politics Schuh, Tibetan op. (wordly names: cit., p. affairs), /hun-grub 169. The in easy (having same to obtain." 'Phags-pa-Schrift, character everything bsil is \[dan repeated without is probably 8 effort) times VGH a paraphrase Wissenschaftsverlag, on (nr. both 8-11), sides blo-bzang for of Tibet the early St. which (noble Augustin silver is minded) also tangkas 1981, known (nr. illustrated p. 8 as 21. -12) bsil Schuh's and on ljongs pp. lha seal 58- bio in Tibetan, Nr. 59 (nr. (nr. 8-13). E13. 1-58 meaning The The to seal last 1-60), "cool name has which country". been probably in read my Thus represents view by a free Schuh could translation the as: be short a sa reason of form skva the padbang seal why of two inscription these names gi/las coins which could ka may may (\{Official\] be be "Tibet, be attributed for \[country\] activity example to the of /ha where period the dbang religion Sa-skya-pa when (king the and of politics potentate). second gods) and Demo \[exist\], b/o-bzang. regent \[and where\] was Also ruling''. everything seal nr. 8-14 can (p. be obtained 461) is private, without effort". bearing The the expression name grub chos which srid represents refers to the a dual shortened system name, of the Tibetan perhaps government dngos grub which (absolute is most knowledge apparent of from the the truth)'\*. fact that Seals all important nrs. 8-15 government and 8-16 on positions the same were page held by bear two as persons, their only one being inscription a lay and the the syllable other sa, a monk while official. the last This two, expression, numbered in 8-17 the form and 8-18 of chos are anepigraphic. srid gnyis Idan Seal (possessing nr. 8-18 has both the religion design of and a politics) scorpion. can According also be found to Rockwell as part of the the king legends of Dege of some (eastern late Tibetan Tibet) was coins. previously See the 10 using srang a coins "scorpion and the seal" patterns (Tibetan illustrated sdigon dam)" pp. 134-140.. Without consulting documents which bear the corresponding imprint, it is, however, impossible to attribute the seal with scorpion design to a specific person or authority.

The four seals nrs. 8-15 to 8-18 are most probably also unrelated to any Tibetan government office.

Notes 1. Spink: Ancient, Foreign and United States Coins, New York, 11/12 December 2000, lot 97. 2 Spink: op. cit, lot 109 (illustrated as nr. 110). This coin was previously in the collection of Gilbert Richardson Spink: op. cit., lot 110 (illustrated as nr. 111). Ex Collection Gilbert Richardson. The late Gilbert Richardson had bought the half zho coins Jia Qing year eight and Dao Guang first year, similar to the ones illustrated on pp. 72 and 74 of the book under review, in the following auction: Money Company, Hongkong 5/6th September 1986, lots 897 and 896. They are now in the collection of Nicholas Rhodes. See also: Rhodes, Nicholas: "Some Sino-Tibetan Forgeries". In: Vumismatics International bulletin, Vol. 20, Nr. 11, Dallas, November 1986, pp. 254-256 4+. Rhodes, Nicholas: "A Tibetan Forgery". In: Spink Numismatic Circular, Vol. 86, July/August 1978, pp. 364-365 As the most striking feature of this forgery, Rhodes points out the elongated vertical stroke in the Tibetan letter "ma" in the syllable "mam" on the reverse of the coin. The earliest known publication ws
6. Wesley 5.. Anonymous: Goldstein, Gabrisch See Numismatics which cf. also: Bertsch. Halpert. illustrates Rhodes, Karl: Melvyn (Numismatic International See Wolfgang: Geld this Nicholas Spink, C.: aus forgery A History Tibet, op. Research "The G.: Bulletin, cit., is Ausstellung "A Kalgan of lot Tibetan Communist Modern Institute 147 Vol. Shih: 32, 3 des Tibet, of Sho Chinese Modern Nr. Munzkabinetts the 1913-1951. 9, Copper Institute September Coins Restrike". Coin" of of The der Finance China 1997 In ما‎ of Spink Shanghai pp. Demise Stadt the 225 Winterthur, Numismatic Tibet of - 231. the 1949 Branch Lamaist (Reprint: Winterthur Circular, of the State, Shanghai People's June Munshiram and Rikon, 1975, Bank 1989), p. of 1990, Manoharlal 239 illustration China): p. 61 "Xi Publishers A10-1 Zang (p. Di 9) Pvt Fang 10. Zhen A Ltd, The specimen New Tibetan Fu De Delhi, Zhao in spelling silver 1993 Bi Chang dog-sde, (originally of this (The without forgery published Mint of the was the intial by also Local California a in chung Tibetan the as collection Press suggested in of Government)". in 1989), one of p. Gabrisch's 229. In: China spellings, Numismatics is recorded (Zhong in the Guo following Qian Bi), publication Nr. 22 Beijing, Wu Zhen 1990.1, Hua and pp. Zhu 29-42. Bian: Xizang Diming. Bod ljons sa ming. Place names of the Xizang autonomous region. Zhong guo zang xue chu ban ~s ao Major variants of the Tibetan \*

## ~~ - ال \| ~ الى‎ he id ee

11 12. 13. 14 15. 18. 16. 17. 19. she Cao Ciren Rhodes, Narbeth, Narbeth, Bertsch, Bertsch, Rockwell, For chu a Gang: list Ping-cuo ban. Nicholas Wolfgang: Wolfgang: Colin Colin of John: Zhong Beijing, Tibetan & & and "The Snorrason, Snorrason, G.: Guo Zhu A. "Some names 1995, "Two Labyrinth Study Xi Jinzhong: Zang p. and Difficulties Rare of Gylfi: Gylfi: 131 their Di Tibetan of Tibetan "Xi Feng Tibetan Catalogue loc. meaning zang In Paper cit Huo Coins." Dating Seals". di Bi see: Money. of fang (Chinese An Tibetan In: Losang In: jin ONS Early With Vajra wan Paper Tibet's Thonden: Newsletter Tibetan a zhou Dhatu Critical bi de No. Coin." Sun., Regional xia Bibliography. Money, \\lodern jan 124, Vol. In: - Published lun Tibetan May-June Currency), V1, Numismatics bai Tibetan Nr. yin Language. by 5, wu 1990 June/July Sichuan Geoffrey Works liang International Library tanga Minzi and 1985, Flack, Archives. bi" of Chubanshe, p. Bulletin Vancouver, Tibetan (Article 15 Dharamsala, Works on Vol. Chengdu, Canada, the 25, silver and No. 1997, Archives 2001, 1999, tangka 8 August p. (206.م‎ 47 28 pp. valued Vol 1990, illustrated), Il, pp. at Dharamsala, 5 184-185 srang). p. 76 In: 1986, China pp. Numismatics 180-193 (Zhongguo, Qianbi), 1997, issue \| (nr. 56), pp. 28-29 and 36. 3 zho™ copper coins (Y 27.1)

Fig.1: Common obv. Variety with three mountains, three cloud-line segments and one cloud to the left. Fig.2 (below): Scarce obv. Variety with three mountains, two cloud-line segments and two clouds.
## Fig. variety four 3: Common reverse conch with dots above conch

Scarce reverse Fig. 5: 0 lines and jety one dot c above conch 5, wi, Fig. variety 5 variety 6: Scarce reverse conch e reverse conch with one line with 6 and tw one dot above conch.
## Tibetan Currency Units By Wolfgang Bertsch

Two The The i. ii.The The different The Only lsrang Igian lsawa The China. probably Tibet only srang, original srang, in older later was = =10 \> 1908 systems metal 20 6 introduced system, along called qung meaning system as AD qian currency was of most with "zho™) kier (or based currency the based (barley from of "chien"; its currency which silver the on tenth Nepal on the units currency grains)" circulated Chinese srang srang, part. the were in units the tam issued the was units word used 16" in used zho, or introduced Tibet as skar in for tangka, century. is a Tibet worldwide, what coin frequently before (one during in for most from tenth the the originally the mentioned part introduction period of the was when as zho), of a a gold coinage Nepalese unit zho and to and weigh and silver coins srang paper gold weight in are money and the closely in silver 16" the were Blue century connected and produced: Annals'. was were based with From most on the the about probably process Chinese the of silver weighing. thirteenth Hang ingots (or Thus century tael) from S.C. which China both Das was (sycee) records units equal were skar, which to slightly primarily skar-ka were more called and used than skar- ria as 37 rmig silver kha grams, as ma, weights. meaning a varying term that "weight", in refers different to skar-tshed their periods shape and as which meaning different was similar "measure", areas, to but a officially horse-shoe. "scale"; skar-ba fixed According as as "points "Kuping to Walsh on Tael" a steel-yard three for different payment for weight sizes of or government were measure". used taxes which In connection in had the the beginning with following zho of he names this records century and zho-cha values: with as the Ta-mig-ma a colloquial weight of (rta term 37.312 rmig- for grams'. ma, a pair horse of Supposedly hoof, scales 60-70 for the weighing rupees); srang as Yak-mig-ma gold weight and unit silver. had (gyag existed rmig-ma, For srang in Tibet yak he already records hoof, 12-14 two the rupees) meaning generations and "pair Ra-mig-ma before of scales, the (goat's rule balance" of hoof; King and 2-3 Srong rupees)'. "weight Tsang in a Gampo general (srong-btsan sense". He also sgam-po), mentions i.e. the in expressions the late 6th srang century la AD. 'digs At pa that or srang time la the gzhal-ba following as subdivisions meaning "to of weigh, the srang to balance". are said The to have term existed: rgya-srang means "Chinese weight or steel-yard.""

first time; till then the srang had only been used as a unit of

account. The The Between However, value next coins 1953 of the its issued and standard dngu/ 1954 in srang srang was صم‎ a reduced in were coin 1919 silver to in AD 50% the coins is of style given its of original 3 of srang as the \| weight, tupee which earlier were and "Gaden i.e. to first 11 about Tangkas" annas minted 18.65 approximately in grams. 1933 was minted AD and which weighed in good in weight the silver, same is equal had as the a to weight Indian 19.683 rupee, grams. of about i.e. 5 about grams 11.66 and was grams. reportedly Hence the given srang's the value standard of was 5 srang, further which reduced shows to that one the third standard of an of Indian the silver rupee; srang in fact was its value again considerably was even slightly reduced, less reaching than that. less This than must 1/37" have part been of its the approximate standard of the silver srang when the first 100 tam srang notes were issued in 1937 AD.

original The The weight silver expressions srang standard. (dngul "dngul srang) srang" had and the "tam following srang" were used subdivisions: concurrently. \| am not aware that there existed any difference in value between the two. Thus one reads "tam srang" on the first 100 Srang bank notes, wheras the 25 srang notes mention ~shog dngul srang" ("paper silver srang") in the last line of the obverse legend.

١dngulsrang(srang-gang)=10zho(sho)=6tangka+1zho |zho(zho-gang)=10skar=4kha 1kha(kha-gang)=24skar

The When The The According rdo-tshad following referring tam, to tangka, R. which to subdivisions C. one tamka Temple equals unit or the 50 tangka of tamga' dngul syllable the is srang "srang" was "a "gang" word introduced was and (e.g. only of "tanka" ancient "zho- used into as gang") Tibet existed, Indian a unit from origin is showing of added account. Nepal and how to and usage the Furthermore the originally name "new" for a of unit weight one was the "tangka" skar currency equivalent and was coin". was divided unit to fitted about It while into has into 10.5 the 10 the the syllable grams following already 'on; however, of existing "do" silver. alternative this (e.g. system In smallest about "zho-do") forms: based 1640 unit tank, on is AD was the added dank, the "srang": never Nepalese dangh when minted. referring and Malla the kingdoms Burmese to two units. replaced form dingd. For this three Also heavy or taka more standard (surviving units the by singular as a the lighter currency form one is of used unit roughly as in can present be 5.6 seen day grams. Bangladesh) on The the copper coins and struck coins tic/kJal of to three this (a and standard Burmese five zho, in weight Nepal of 2% unit) were 5 and may called 7% be skar variant mohurs and forms (mohars) on the of silver tangka''. and coins were It of also exported 3 and survives 10 to srang. Tibet in the in Russian large numbers. word for "money", After the Tibet-Nepal "dengi". The war word of 1792, tanka Nepal may have was deprived reached of Tibet its already privilege before of minting the introduction coins for Tibet of Nepalese and from coins, then either onwards directly the from ~zho™ India and the or via "tangka" Nepal or were some the other main bordering currency state. units which were struck in Tibet. Even in the beginning of the twentieth century, when the first banknotes were introduced, the "srang" had not yet been firmly established as a currency unit among the Tibetan population, since the coins struck in this denomination in 1908 were few and, being of good silver, were mostly hoarded. This explains why the first Tibetan paper notes were issued in tam rather than in srang. According to Wesley E. Needham in 1914, when the early Tam notes circulated, the value of 1 Tam was equivalenttoUS$0.12.'°

'211lsrang١11tangkasrangtangkazhogangkha-chagtangka==10zho====0.15==1.516%tangka6phyad10zhokhasrangskar==brgyad1001512%=skar4skarkhaskar==746khaskar ا‎ tangka = 1 skarma ngna= 5 skar 1/6tangka=1khakang=2%skar

In Chinese literature occasionally the following expressions are used for the units based on the srang (Hang). The expressions

given in brackets are those used in older western literature on China.
1Hang(tael)=10qian[or"chien"](mace) 1qian(mace)=10fen(candareens) 1fen(candareen)=10li(cash) Tibetan eqivalents 1srang=10zho 1zho=10skar 1skar=10'on

The value of the early Tibetan tam banknotes expressed in the srang system are as follows:

515tamtam==72zhosrang+5+skar2zho(=+7165skarzho(==%2'srang)srang) 2510tamtam==31srangsrang++57zhozho(=+51%skarsrang)(=3%srang) 50tam=7srang+5zho(=76srang).

For the Tibetan banknotes issued from 1939 AD onwards the unit "srang™ was used.

Popular Tibetan names for coins and their fractions circulating in Tibet

As mentioned above, the tangka of Nepalese origin was called "mahendramalli" (or mandermal) in the 18" century as recorded by Italian missionaries like da Fano for 1713 and by Turner for 1783 who gives the variant spelling "indermillee"'\*. This was the term used in Nepal which was imported into Tibet along with the coin which was also called "bal-tam" or "bal tang" by the Tibetans who referred to Nepal as "bal-yul" (wool-country). There also existed special terms for some of the Nepalese coins used in Tibet: The Malla coins were also called nag-tam or naktam", "black tam", particularly the mohars of Ranjit Malla of Bhatgaon which turned black owing to their low silver content. The mohar of Bhupatindra Malla of Bhaktapur was called Angtuk (ang-drug; "number six") from the last figure of its date 6 N.S. (Nepal Samvat). The Malla coins circulating in Tibet were also called "Pa-nying tangka", (bal rnying tang-ka, "old Nepalese coins") or Dung-tang, "spear tang-ka" or Dung-tse (bdung-rtse, "spear point"). The latter names are derived from the tridents or swords which appear on many specimens'.

The kha-gang skarma-Inga phyad one encountered; zho Nepalese rgyad = = % 1/6 = = tangka tangkas, 5 7! th see skar of skar note a = tangka = particularly '4 16) '2 of tangka a (this tangka fraction those of is the not Saha period struck by Pratap Singh, were also called gcod-tang, "tangka for cutting", as they were frequently cut in order to obtain the following fractions (fig. 1, below):

From Rockhill Surviving about reports fractions 1840 that a type of the Nepalese the of "gaden silver tangkas tangka tangkas" show was were struck that cut the at in eastern Lhasa coins were which Tibet originally and later he became always illustrates cut known with examples in a straight the of west these line, as producing fractions, "gaden tangka". giving fractions them Rockhill with the three same was petals perhaps names'®. for the the skarma-nga, But first in to eastern use fractions this Tibet western with the name fractions four petals which were for is obtained the derived phyed by from brgyad cutting the and first the fractions whole two syllables coin with like five of a petals pie. the According legend for the zho-gang"". found to Walsh on this I have this coin'®. mode not The seen of cutting common a fraction was term representing only used practised in a Tibet kha- in gang for northern this although coin and was eastern some "tangka authors Tibet dkar-po" and report the gaden their which existence"'. tangkas could be thus contracted cut were to called "tang-dkar" Pongo ("white mig pa tangka"; (bong-gu-rmig-pa; see note 9). "donkey's hoof"). Walsh, who stayed in Lhasa in 1904, did not encounter any gaden tangkas cut in this nor in any other manner''. The only Gaden tangka fraction which appears to be the result of old cuts for the purpose of small change, is a piece with four lotus leaves representing the unit "phyed rgyad" (7% skar) from a private Nepalese collection (fig. 2)'\*.

Kong-par lhe 13-45 13-46 13-47 15-24 The 15-25 so Kong-par beu bcu beu معط‎ مءم‎ called tangka gsum gsum gsum for \[or Sino-Tibetan beu\] beu\] tangkas\*\* bzhi bzhi bzhi dated: Inga Inga dgu gdun nga nyer nyer which coinage \[or for gnyis\] gnyis\] were of first the bzhi Inga" eras struck Qian in Long, 1791, Jia took Qing their and popular Dao Guang names was from first the minted figures for seen general on their circulation obverses in which four represent different the denominations Tibetan dates: dated Qian Long 58" year, i.e. "١.ملا‎ "2 tangka, 1 zho, \| tangka, but so far I have found only one source mentioning how these coins were called popularly: ~chanja paulung™', an expression which may be based on the coins in the name of Jia Qing but may have served to refer to any Sino-Tibetan coin struck in Lhasa in the late 18" and early 19"" century. Present-day antique dealers from Lhasa usually refer to the Sino-Tibetan coins as "pao tsang" following part of their Tibetan legend. From Qian Long 59" year onwards only coins of zho-weight were struck for circulation, but these coins had the same value as the Nepalese tangkas and the Kong-par tangkas which were struck since 1791. It was prohibited to cut the Sino-Tibetan coins in order to obtain small units for change, a prohibition which everybody seemed to have respected as fractions are not met with, excepting some examples which seem to be modern fragments from silversmith workshops". Also fractions of Kong-par tangkas are very rarely met with, the only published reference being a skarma-nga illustrated by Walsh"'.

The In It should the Indian twentieth be rupee noted century which that the circulated Tibetans term tangka referred in Tibet or to its was the shorter popularly 20 srang form gold called tam is coin Pphi-ling occasionally as "gser sgor-mo used tam" to (gold or refer chhi-ling tam). to the srang. This gor-mo. may As early ("foreign have as led 1713 round some Da coin"). western Fano writes specialists Baber that records the to Tibetans argue the expression that have a tangka a currency "Peiling-tchranka" struck unit in called gold must tangh and which also have reports existed is equivalent that, in Tibet. in to Eastern 6% However, petanh Tibet, (bal-tam, so special far only i.e. words Nepalese an for early different mohar). Shri The types Mangalam word of Indian "tangh" tamga rupees in of the this were 18" case used: century, clearly Georgian struck refers in rupees gold to were and the clearly (dngul) called of srang"'. Tibetan origin, has been discovered"'. There exist very few Gaden tangkas struck in gold, including the so-called "monk tamga" or "Kelsang (skal-bzang) Tamga" of 1909; it is believed, however, that these coins were either struck unofficially in Nepal for religious puposes or are modern phantasies. In the expression gser tam "tangka" or "tam" takes the wider meaning "coin". Baber notes for eastern Tibet: "A coin is called in Tibetan tchranka.""\*
p'o-tu Sichuan (male head) rupees and were Victorian simply rupees called sgor-mo mo-tu (female (round head). coin) The or rgya-sgor rupees showing (Chinese Victoria Coin) and with rgya-mgo crown "are (Chinese named head).\*! Lama tobdu or 'vagabond Lama', the crown having been mistaken for the head-gear of a religious mendicant."\*°

## Modern Tibetan coinage (1908-1954)

All The modern one srang Tibetan is called coins srang-gang are inscribed sgor-mo with or short their denomination, excepting the "Gaden tangkas". Apart from the official name indicated on the coins, some of them had their popular names. However, \| am not sure in every case wether the terms which I record for the modern coinage are those which were used at the time when the corresponding coins circulated or whether they are modern expressions used by coin and antique dealers in the Lhasa market from whom \| was given many of the expressions mentioned below. Nr. 1 -3 Nr. 4-6

srang-sgor'\*. 'The The The The "Kalsang 3 large Gaden srang The 5 skar coins tangka one tangka" coin srang (Y25 of (early (Y17) coins and double monk 26) was (Y12, weight are called tangka; A18 referred skar-chen and which Y14) to A18.1) was as western (large srang also are collectors called skar), gsum inscribed sgor-mo while "tubshi with normally the "tam (round (gru much srang-gang" bzhi) call coin smaller, "double of tangka", three later (one srang) tangka" "tangka issue tam and srang). (Y19) (Y15) with the was 10 four was srang referred corners" locally coins to (according referred as as skar hcu-sgor chung to as to (round zho information (small gsum, coin skar). "three of given The ten) zho" flower (Y29 by according a Nepalese and shaped 30). to 2/6 The collector Charles skar last (Y Tibetan Bell.' to A19) the late was silver Karl called tangka, Gabrisch). khagang which zur was bzhi minted (with four in 1953/54, corners) is called tangka dkarpo sarpa (new white tangka) (Y31). Nr. la-3a Nr 4a - 6a

Fig. 1: Examples of cut pieces obtained from tangkas (nohurs) struck for Tibet by Pratap Simha. Nr. 1 and 18: piece with five fleurets (petals) representing the unit zho-gang. The pieces nr. 2, 3, 4 and 5 (sa, 3a, 4a and Sa) represent the same unit, although more silver has been cut away to a greater or lesser degree. The coin fragment nor. 6 and 6a, showing three fleurets, represents the unit skar-ma Inga (five skar). Illustrations are enlarged approximately x 3.
## Rare fragment of gaden tangka showing four petals, representing the unit phyed brgyad (seven and a half skar). Photographed by Karl Gabrisch in Nepal Notes ad. E.H.C. \\Valsh gives. Cf. Morse, Hosea Ballau: The Trade and Administration of the Chinese

Empire. Bombay and Calcutta 1908. pp. 119 sqq.. Zhu Jingzhong, Ci-ren Ping-cuo and Yan Lunzhang: Yuan-Xi-Zang-

Di-Fang-Qian-Bi-Gai-Kuang Roerich, Walsh, Das, Sarat E.H.C.: George: Chandra: "The The Coinage A Blue Tibetan-English Annals. \[A of General Tibet." Reprint Introduction In: Dictionary, New Memoirs Delhi, to of with the 1976 the Sanskrit Tibetan Asiatic (first Local published Scociety Synonyms, Currency\] of in Bengal. Revised Calcutta, Finance Vol. by 1949). Il, Graham No.2, Department For Calcutta references Sandberg of 1907, the and to the pp. Tibetan A. gold 11-23. William srang Autonomous Heyde. see e.g Region pp. Reprinted 112, Branch 927, by 1026 Motilal of the and People's Banarsidas, 1027. For Bank a New reference of China, Delhi to Lhasa 2000, the silver 1988. pp. 86, srang, 1076 see and p. 1064. 1286-87. The Blue Annals were written between A.D. 1476 and A.D 1481.. Bell, Charles: Manual of Colloquial Tibetan. Reprint: Ratna Pustak

Bhandar, Kathmandu, 1978 (first edition 1905), p. 118. Bell gives the value of the dngul srang as one rupee eleven annas approximately.. For the calculations of the weight standard of the srang, \| treat the silver

coins issued in Tibet in the srang denomination as having a "theoretical" fineness of 100% silver although the actual fineness was only just above 80% for the coins which were minted in srang denomination.. The Indian Rupee found wide circulation in Tibet after its introduction

within the uniform coin the system following established three in British spellings India for in the 1835. word Its weight had been fixed in that year at 180 grains (1 grain = 0.0648 gram) which is equal to 11.664 grams. Cf. Chakravarty, D.: Nineteenth & Twentieth Century Coins of India. Calcutta, 1979, p. 19. "tangka": 1. "anusvara"\] above the letter "ta") 2

(trang-ka). The Sanskrit sound (tamka, "ta" is rendered with a small with inverted circle \[Sanskrit: Tibetan "ta" in order to indicate that the "ta" is pronounced (tang-ka) as a retroflex and 3. sound (with the tip of the tongue curled back). This pronunciation can also be

indicated in Tibetan by subscribing the sound "r" (rata) to "ta" as seen in the third example.

cf. W. The The Walsh, Surkhang historical forms E.H. "tang-ka" use mentions C.: of op. the and cit. word the (footnote "trang-ka" additional "tanka" 4) and in spelling which similar the "Tarn forms letter in dkar" Russia "ma" which and has represents changed Asia is demonstrated to a "nga" contraction probably with of owe numerous "tang-ka their existence references dkar-po" to the by: (white assimilation Temple, tangka) Richard of the and originally Carnac: sound "ma" "Currency may to the only following and have Coinage referred sound among to "ka" coins the of Burmese." good silver In: which The looked /ndian Antiquary. "white", cf. Surkhang, A Journal Wangchen: of Oriental Tax Research, Measurement Vol. and XXVI, Lag 'don Bombay. Tax In: September Bulletin 1897, of Tibetology, pp. 235-244. Vol. Ill, Nr. 1, Gangtok, February 1966. pp 15-28.

10. Il. 12. 14. 13. 16. 17. 18. 19. Cammann, Attempts Connecticut Numismatics, des Cammann Markham, p. Wood; China This douziéme, The Mehnder-mulli Kirkpatrick, Hue, Tibet 167 Walsh, That Wood, The op. Turner, Rockhill. Unpublished Rockhill, Montgomerie, 129, Moines), and French is Régis-Evariste cit. and illustration the 1844-6. note Howland: confirmed plate Howland: E.H.C.: Samuel: (see to value of reports Paris Clements: Schuyler: op. William travellers 1. 1970 the Colonel: Annales Open 25, Vol. footnote Broadway cit., letter (Duncan). of Journey 1906, T.G. of op. (Originally op. the by the An XLVI, "The pp. fig. Tibet. and of Woodville: Trade cit. additonal Narratives Milloué, du pp. cit., record op. fractions Captain: Account 4) 207-08. Wesley 2 Coinage Travellers, of Musée Gabet, (footnote 136-137. no. plate cit. is Greenwood Through Thomas published based the p. 4, Rockhill L. variants 25, was "Report of Guimet. E. Joseph: 339. New name of of The de: an nr. 4), Needham on Volume Manning identified the the Tibet". Bod-Youl York, Land 6..م‎ Embassy a 1951), for "mahndra-mailli" illustrates Press, Himalayas. of Mission Travels photograph Bibliotheque 14 the a of II, In: October to to p. Route-Survey by 1/2 the.م‎ Publishers, ou American Lhasa, in 108, to Jeseph of counting 180. a tangka Lamas. Tartary Tibet the small The George taken note 1912, d'études, London Court Early J. (Bogle) (le 37. fraction fraction Journal the by Notes Thibet Woodbum Westport, made pp. Paradis Bogle the number British of tome 1876, 164- and of the of and late by as of to a a Journey Jr.. Pundit gaden of Teshoo Karl petals dated Gabrisch. tangka \*\*\* Lama Through April is from clearly in which 4, Tibet. Nepal China 1951. stated he London to identifies My Mongolia Lhasa, by thanks Hue 1800 and as and go and (Reprint: "K'A-GANG" thence to Gabet Tibet. N.G. through Bibliotheca Rhodes who Longmans, (p. stayed the for 207) Upper Himalayica, having in Green, along Lhasa Valley made with and in Series acopy of Co., three early the London 1846. other 1, of Vol. Bramapoutra this fractions 4, 1891 letter Manjusri (Reprint: available which to Publishing its to Asian he source". me. identifies Educational House, In: New as Journal "DJO-GANG", Services, Delhi, of 1971), New the p. Royal Delhi, "CHI- 372. \\Vhile Geographical CHYE" 1988), the pp. and 207-08. term "KARMA-NGA". Society, "mahendramalli" vol. XXXVIII, H. is clearly Wood p. 173. derived illustrates from a similar the name small of the fraction Nepalese which ruler he also Mahendra identifies Malla, as "Kha-kang" Turner's (sixth "indermillee" part of a seems tangka). to have Actually been Wood derived may from reproduce the name the of reverse king Indra of the Malla. piece, The the alternative obverse spelling (script side) "Mehnder-Mulie" of which is illustrated is given by Rockhill. by Kirkpatrick, I presume Colonel: that Rockhill An Account donated his of Tibetan the Kingdom coins to the of museum Nepaul. of the Being Smithsonian the Substance Institute of in Observations Washington and made that during they a were Mission subsequently to that Country photographed in the Year for 1793, H. Wood. London Rockhill 1811 (reprinted and Wood by are Asian the Educational only authors Services, \| am aware New of Delhi who mention 1986), p. the 217. "kha-gang" as a result of cutting tangkas.
20. 21. 22. 23. "Tche-Ptche" E. Rawat, Three Walsh, Filchner, Kawaguchi fractions!.5.: H.C.: \\Vilhelm: Indian which uses "The of a silver Explorers Coinage the similar Kumbum editor zho word of issues of Paul Tibet". The Dschamba "kabchi" Pelliot in Nineteenth the Memoirs name as interprets Ling. meaning Century, of of Qian Das the as five Asiatic "kha-phyed", Long Kloster 1973, kha and (or p. Society 92 der 20 Jia Japanese pronounced Hunderttausend The Qing of Bengal, explorer were sen), published vol. "khapch'e". Kishen i.e. Bilder Il, 12% nr. recently Singh Maitreyas, 2, skar, However, Calcutta, mentioned which in China Leipzig "Tche-Ptche" also 1907, that represents 1933,.م‎ there 12 p. illustrates must 398 were a unit be two of the a account Kong-par types French of transcription Cf. Filchner Tibetan Zhu tangka Kawaguchi, Jin fraction Zhong silver also for gives coins \[Chief which Ekei: "phyed-brgyad", the in editor\], Three he spelling circulation. identifies Years Wang phyed which the in Hai as gced Tibet. "chanja a Yan, means 1/6 (which Biblioteca Wang tangka, paulung" "half he Dui eight", but transcribes Himalayica, \[dbang (clearly the ie. present 'dus\] 7! the as skar. Ratna "Dschedtschad" Sino-Tibetan and owner Tsering The Pustak of meaning this Pincuo: coins) Bhandar, piece, and of "kha-phyed" which Zhong N. struck Kathmandu, 0. he Guo Rhodes. in takes fine is Xi most Zang 1979 identified from silver, probably Qian (Originally G.C. and it Bi Cybikov: "half as the \[Chinese a published kha", '4 other tangka. Buddhist i.e. Tibet's coins 14 in cf. palomnik skar, 1909), "distinguished Money\] Rhodes, a p. fraction Nicholas Xi 461. i swiatyn Zang Note, which by G., Zi Tibeta the however, exists Zhi Gabrisch, names Ou \[A only that Buddhist Qian as Karl of Charles a unit Bi the and Pilgrim Xue of rulers Bell Valdettaro account Hui gives at who \[Tibet the a Pontecorvo different holy issued autonomous places word them" della of for Tibet\], (presumably region Rocchetta, the numismatic Petrograd, unit Carlo: of referring account The society\]., 1919, Coinage to consisting pp. Beijing, the 166-68) of old Nepal of 2002, instead Nepalese five from.م‎ kha: 152, of the coins) phyed kha-chag. nrs. earliest 1-411 brgyad. with times cf. to 1-413 alloy Bell, The until Charles: literal (N.G.Rhodes) The appearance meaning Manual of of of phyed Colloquial these gced pieces is Tibetan. "half leaves cut", Biblioteca no gced doubt being that Himalayica, the they past -were form Series not of gcod II, intended Vol. (to cut). 15, to circulate Ratna This form Pustak as fractional may Bhandar. represent currency Katmandu, a popular re-interpretation 1978 (first edition or a simple 1905), p. misunderstanding, 118. as the pronunciation of both forms is indeed very similar in Tibetan. However, the Tibetan 7/2 copper coins which were struck in the 20" century all have the inscription "phyed brgyad" to indicate their denomination.

24. 25. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. and p. Rockhill, Currency\], transliterated Rhodes, Tibetan \| See /911. Oral Rockhill, Walsh, Baber, Unpublished Xiao 1 Baber, only Petech, Thwing, 259 saw also Tibet information Royal know this Huaiyuan: original N.G.: E.G.: Part H.C. E.G: \\Villiam in Luciano: William E. gold Beijing 1891 Numismatic IM of W: from "On "The op. Diary op.cit. spelling. coin.م‎ two "Tibet, obtained and cit., Woodville: the Woodville, Xizang 1987, 236 First / Xiao with of more Missionari 1892, Chinese was.م‎ Sir and Coins New chapter Society. a Huaiyuan's from 198 Difeng Newari ا‎ probably Charles Smithsonian Part or tangka op. Diary Struck tea-trade Tibetan III, Recent 3. cit. Special Italiani Huobishi dealer \| Bell,.م‎ of give the (footnote in fractions Chinese 324, a antique Tibet". with Issues". Institute, first in entry Publication Journey the nel Nepal footnote \[The Tibet". Tibetan author 16), Tibet obtained In: transliteration dated dealers In: Washington, in through The Regional.م‎ The 45 2001 In: to e 208, No. 26.8.1920 expressions Tibet in nel Geographical use Numismatist, by Lhasa 21, fooinote Mongolia Journal, cutting Nepal. the Tibetan London of 1894, in term This the re- the 1. a \| "Kong-par Vol. Capuceint kong-par Society Walsh, entry 1989, Vol. 1990s XV, 45, gives p. Supplementary H.C. 208 No. no. tangka, Marchiani, tangka" brief op. 7, 4, July Dharamsala cit. explanations one 1932, for (footnote in part Papers, the these p. Ill, Winter, collection 452. 4), to Tibetan vol. Vol. a.م‎ photograph Il, 1990, 22. 1, part of Rome silver Both Klaus.م‎ 1, 126,footnote 1953, London words coins of Bronny Tibetan.م‎ are which 1882, 13. most and coins The 23 p. were one probably 198 original -which in first my minted own reference Tibetan Bell collection later in spyi-gling, reads published 1791. as Rhodes follows: in spyt the mentions following "Li meaning buttiani that book: "outside", da "Rockhill, queste Portrait "foreign" monete in of Journey the imprese Dalai and through Lama, ging fuori Mongolia dal "continent" Collins, loro London regno and ne Tibet, 1946, formano.م‎ photograph 259, una called propria, XIX. them opposite ma Bo-gi idealmente. gyalpa-gi p. 161 ع‎ la tanka chiamano (The King tangh, of che Tibet's consta tangka) di 6 petanh in his e diary due terzi, entry \[...\]" for 27. 9. 1892. Presumably these coins were still, at the end of the nineteenth century, associated with the Chilung Tulku who was regent in 1791 and popularly known as the «King of Tibet»."

## An Early Western Report on the Currency of Tibet By Wolfgang Bertsch

In the Petech, It In first is part noteworthy third Luciano: 111 (Vol of the / that II) missionari 18" of Domenico century, the same italiani da Lhasa work Fano nel did Tibet (Rome, does not e nel not yet 1953), Nepal. mention have the its \|\| Nuovo "Breve two fame items as Ramusio Relazione the which "forbidden are II, del normally Raccolta city" P. Domenico which discussed di Viaggi, it gained da in relation Fano Testi in the (1713)" to e 19" Tibet Documenti and \[Short when the account traditional first Relativi half ai by of currency Rapporti the Father 20" Domenico century. is fra dealt L'Europa with: Numerous da Fano\] ع‎ cowries \|'Oriente Italian is (cypraea published a missionaries Cura moneta) dell' (pp. Istituto 3-37). were and This active Italiano account in per Lhasa. il contains Medio The only ed one Estremo trace of the left Oriente. earliest nowadays (7 and volumes), of most the missions detailed Rome, western which 1952-1956. existed descriptions in Lhasa of is Tibet's a bell currency that can be (pp. admired 15-15) at (notes the ceiling 45-48 of are the those main of entrance the editor, porch Luciano of the Petech). Jokhang, Tibet's most important Biddhist temple. Fortunately, however, many missionary reports have survived and many were collected and made available in the following Italian publication:

tea bricks. The The Nepalese illustrated Apparently coins coins cowries "mandermal" were were probably not to any which sent more Da by in Fano missionaries use as refers small in the change beginning in the early of the 18" passage century, were, although among even others, nowadays of the they type are of two sold of in the markets three of mohurs Lhasa which where are they illustrated are popularly as Tibetan used as coins game in the counters following along 18" with century demonetised classic on 1 sho China: and P.J.B. 5 sho Duhalde, copper coins. de la Compagnie Either tea compressed de Jésus: into Description bricks was Géographique, not yet known in Historique, the early Chronologique, 18" century, or Politique, tea bricks et were Physique already de used, \|'Empire but de may la not Chine have et de achieved la Tartarie their status Chinoise. as widely Enrichie used currency de Cartes which Générales they obtained & in Particuliéres the 19" century. de ces! Pays, de la Carte Génerale et des Cartes Particuliéres du Thibet, & de la Corée, & ornée d'un grand nombre de Figures de Vignettes gravées en Taille-douce. A Paris chez P.G. Lemercier, Imprimeur-Libraire, rue Saint Jacques, au Livre d'Or, 1735 (four volumes). The coin plate which I reproduce below is taken from the english edition, published in 1736, volume II, p.290.
residing in Lhasa to their colleagues in China where they were obtained for the illustration in Duhalde's work. The coin shown in The Reverse

Silver mohar of Bhupatindra Malla, King of Bhadgaon, dated Nepal Samvat 816 (1696 Ald), RGV 539 The Keverse

Fig. 2 was minted after Da Fano had written his report. Lhe Reverve.

Fig. 2 Silver mohar of Mahindra Simha, King of Kathmandu, dated Nepal Samvat 835 (1715 Ab), RGV 303 T5111. Pag. 290 "42 Fig. 3

Silver mohar of Yoga Narendra Malla, King of Patan, Dated Nepal Samvat 805 (1685 Ab), RGV 393?

Italian text with notes by the editor, Luciano Petech

Il denaro Per le che cose corre poi in minute Lassa e si per servono tutoo d'una il regno certa é una commutazione: moneta che viene per esempio da Nekpal, ho bisogno chiamata d'un poco in di quel latte, regno d'erbe, mandermal sale ecc.: prendo \[mahendramalli\], un poco di ع‎ thé \| o Butiani di tabacco la o chiamano di butiro petanh ecc., ع‎ con \[bal-tam\]. queste Questa cose averé é una il moneta mio besogno. rotonda, Se come poi sarebbero il prezzo due della paoli cosa o che un cavalotto vogliono di comprare Bologna; arriva sono alla imprese sesta in parte esse alcune de un letter petanh, col non nome é del necessario Re, regno che e li anno dia l'argento, che sono state ma vi fatte. sono Li alcuni buttiani fazzoletti da queste de monete seta, che impresse corrono fuori per questo dal lor prezzo, regno purché ne formano siano una almeno propria. quadri: ma se idealmente, poi sono pili e la lunghi chiamano que quadri, tangh, che sono consta como di traboccanti, 6 petanh e e cosi due terzi, corrono che senza sarebbero misurarsi.\*® alla nostra Hanno usanza \|'uso ancora tredici di paoli un'altra e un moneta, terzo. con Sopra la questa quale moneta dividono ideale questo hanno fazzoletto alcune bilancie sino alla accommodate 20\* parte, a e tanga questi per sono tanga, alcuni a frutti mezza che per vangano mezza. dall'Industano. a petanh per petanh, Questi a frutti due terzi, al di dentro a un terzo sono e como mezzo noci terzo. moscate, E quando ma non uno hanno no ha odore, di queste e la monete, figura non basta é que totalmente abbia dell'oro consimile: o dell' ع‎ argento; sono chiamati questo si nel pesa Butant con detta Cuid bilancia \[go-yu\]. e E corre li fazzoletti ugualmente di seta a proporzione. che vengano E della ben vero China che e quando servano del la somma Butant per غ‎ gradne, moneta, si bisogna chiamano defalcare Mansé il o Mancia cambio dell'argento \[man-tsi\]"". in moneta, et in tal caso sopra l'argento non monetato vi si perde dieci per cento.\*\*

Quando poi si fa viaggio, bisogna portarsi seco varie cose, como mansé, thé, sale, butiro, tabacco per fumare di quallo della China, una certa tela che chiamano Sams6 \[zam-zo\] che si spende parimente per fazzoletti, kat \[had\], cuit ecc..\*\* perché quando si giunge all'abitato e si addimanda un poco di cianh \[c'an\] 0 orzata per bevere, un poco di paglia per le bestie, un poco di sterco d'animale per fare il fuoco ecc., non sono obbligati a prendere alcuna cosa determinata, ma addimandano quello che hanno bisogno, e se uno no I'ha, quando ti vedessero crepare non te lo daranno. Non voglio dir per questo che I'argento non corra per tutto: ma se si vuol pagare con \|'argento, il viandante non trovera il suo conto. Et anco mi sono trovato aver bisogno d'un poco di farina d'orzo per mangiare, et un'altra volta un pugno de riso, dico un pugno, ع‎ con l'argento non lo potei avere, quantunque per cosi dire mi morissi di fame per aver camminato tutto il giorno antecedente, et avendo trovato quantita di neve su le montagne, non la potei passare quel giorno; le provisioni erano finite e bisogno dormire, o per dir meglio passar quella notte, tra la neve; ed il giorno seguente trovai uno che me diede un pugno di granturco per un poco de tabacco.

47 45 16 Go-yu Sulle \| k/a-btags, monete غ‎ la noce I correnti fazzoletti d'areca, nel che Areca Tibet accompagnano Catechu; e Nepal nella LAUFER, qualsiasi prima p. meta dono 457 del n. o sec. missiva 51. XVIII Non ع‎ che ho vedi vengono notizie Parte IV, sull'uso presentati Appendice di © questo scambiati I. Qui bastera frutto durante ricordare como ogni moneta che visita il di tangh spicciola, riguardo, qui menzionato ma servono va osservato anche non é da il che tam-k'a, moneta. nel distretto Cid ma é il il dnul-sran. di caso Ba-t'an sopratutto le noci per adempiono le due qualita allo migliori, stesso ufficio; di seta, ROCKHILL, chiamate nan-mdsos Ethnology, ed p. a-sé; 719. TUCCI, Man-tsi Lhasa, & il cinese p.65 man-tzu; LAUFER,.م‎ 522.م 280. E fatto di seta gialla con puntini di vari colori. Vedi sopra, n. 46.