
restaurant. The committee will also accommodation, airport transfers and other assi ***New Members*** *European Region *

## New and Recent Publications

The volume on Ottoman coins by Kaan Uslu, Tuncay Kara has now been published. Its İ *mparatorlu* ğ *u Madeni Paraları (Ottoman E* covers the period 1687-1839 ( AH 1099-1255). I reigns of eleven sultans from Süleyman II to M an edition of 500 copies, it lists 3133 coins fr well illustrated throught in colour with 76 drawings. Sample pages can be <http://issuu.com/kaanuslu/docs/ottoman\_empire> The book can be ordered on Ebay for US $52 p <http://cgi.ebay.com/ws/eBayISAPI.dll?ViewIte> 0036&ssPageName=STRK:MESELX:IT \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Atom Damali has ann volume in the proje series *Osmanlı Sikke* *of Ottoman Coins)* h and the book was d distribution in late D volume covers the Selim II,  Murad II with appropriat information and pho 700 coins. The boo Nilufer Damalı Egiti Vakfi, Istanbul 2011. ISBN: 97897-59327-958 Euros. Details of the previous volumes can be fou is a review of the first volume by Richard Doty Institution which can also be found online at: <https://www.coinbooks.org/esylum\_v13n12a03.html> * * * * help to arrange istance ** ** -1-45, list 12 (spring;

- Fatih Beyazıt &  s title is *Osmanlı * *Empire Coins) * and It thus embraces the Mahmut II. Printed in rom 31 mints and is 62 photos and 37
seen online at e\_coins\_. plus postage at $$ em&item=32062932 $$ \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
nounced that the 3 rd ected eight-volume *eleri Tarihi (History * has been completed due to be ready for ecember 2010. This issues of sultans II and Mehmed III te numismatic otographs of around
ok is published by im, Kultur ce Cevre 8. Price: around 100 und online and there y of the Smithsonian

*British * *Museum * *Resea* *Publication No. 174  * *Catalogue of the Japanese C* *Collection (pre* ‐ *Meiji) at the Br* *Museum with special reference* *Kutsuki Masatsuna * by Shin' Sakuraki, Helen Wang and P Kornicki, with Nobuhisa Fur Timon Screech and Joe Cribb

This is the first catalogue of British Museum's impor collection of Japanese co presented in full colour, including first biography in English of t Masatsuna (1750-1802)

The British Museum's collec the best outside Japan. Many of collection of Japan's renowned nu Masatsuna (1750-1802), and w Museum in the 1880s. At the same building up his collection in the were also visiting Japan, paying they sought to gain knowledge and

In the catalogue, details of eac English, along with colour illustra

***Contents*** *:  * Foreword *Joe Cribb * *Japanese Numismatics - Bibliogra* A History of the Japanese Coin Co *Helen Wang * How did Kutsuki Masatsuna's Museum? *Helen Wang * A Brief History of Pre ‐ modern Jap *Shin'ichi Sakuraki * European Interest in Japanese Coi *Peter Kornicki * Kutsuki Masatsuna - A Life *Timon Screech * Kutsuki Masatsuna as Collector an *Shin'ichi Sakuraki and Nobuhisa F* The Japanese Coin Collection (pr Catalogue *Shin'ichi Sakuraki and Nobuhisa* *Joe Cribb and Peter Kornicki) *

***The Authors:*** * * Joe Cribb ** **is Research Keeper in Medals, the British Museum; Nobuhisa Furuta** **is former Chief Oriental Currency, Sapporo; Peter Kornicki** **is Professor of E Cambridge; Shin'ichi Sakuraki** **is Professor of City University; Tim Screech** **is Professor in the H and African Studies, London; Helen Wang** ** is Curator of East As She has published a catalogue o Research Publications Series (no. Published, 224 pages, 90 colo £40

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* British Museum Research Pub *Persian Seals and Amulets in t* Porter, with special assistance Alexander Morton, contributions scientific analysis by Janet Am Meeks and Margaret Sax. *arch * *Coin * *itish * *e to * 'ichi Peter ruta, the rtant oins, g the the Japanese collector Kutsuki tion of Japanese coins is one of
the coins were originally in the umismatist and collector, Kutsuki were acquired by the British e time as Kutsuki Masatsuna was

18th century, European scholars particular attention to coins as d understanding. ch coin are given in Japanese and ations.

*aphic Sources * ollection at the British Museum s Coins Come to the British panese Coinage ins before 1853 nd Numismatist *Furuta * re ‐ Meiji) at the British Museum: *a Furuta (edited by Helen Wang, * n the Department of Coins and f Researcher at the Institute for ast Asian Studies, University of f Japanese History, Shimonoseki History of Art, School of Oriental
sian Money, the British Museum. of Chairman Mao badges in the 169). our plates, PB: 978 086159 174 9, \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
lication No. 160: *Arabic and * *the British* *Museum * by Venetia e from Robert Hoyland and s by Shailendra Bhandare, and mbers, Sylvia Humphrey, Nigel --- --- ---
subject of this paper. All the coins are hybrids, that is, they mule the Class 4 reverse of Justinian showing the θ Y Π O Λ S mint mark with obverses that name earlier Emperors, either Anastasius I or Justin I (518-527). A catalogue of the known examples is at Annex - Before trying to identify a possible historical context for the  coins, a discussion of the known examples is necessary. The group as a whole is composed of three types all of which are mules of one kind or another.  The distinction between type 1 and type 2 rests on the reverse design. **Type 1a**

*Obv.*: Garbled inscription naming Anastasius. Profile bust right with diadem, cuirass and paludamentum.

*Rev.*: M between two eight-pointed stars, cross above, officina letter beneath, θ Y Π O Λ S in exergue.

Nine examples are known, probably all struck with the same obverse die. Three officina (workshop) letters occur: A (one example), B (one) and ∆ (seven). **Type 1b** *Obv*.: Similar type naming Justin. Rev.: Same.

One example is known: MIB volume 3 13, N131 2 (officina ∆ ). **Type 2**

*Obv*.: Garbled inscription naming Anastasius.

*Rev*.: M between two crosses on globes, officina letter beneath, θ V Π O Λ S in exergue.

Two examples are known, both of officina A. The coins appear to be die-linked. ***The dies*** Were the dies used to strike the coins products of the regular mint or were they made outside of the regular Imperial mint system? In relation to this, it is type 1a that is key. The obverse dies are without question irregular. As noted above, Bellinger believed that a regular reverse die was used to strike the D. O. specimen. Peter Donald, though, has commented that the Class 1a reverse dies are good copies 14 Unfortunately, the Class 4 follis of Antioch struck between 537 and 539 is a scarce coin, possibly because it had to be squeezed into the third, truncated, lustrum referred to above. Only three specimens in all are illustrated in D. O. and the catalogues of the United Kingdom and French national collections 15. No dielinks are observable between the coins described here and specimens of Class 4 in these public collections. For the present, whether the reverse dies are regular or not remains unclear. For type 1a, there is a long die-link chain of seven specimens struck, without question, from the same obverse die. For the reasons explained in the catalogue, there are doubts about two of the other coins, although I think it probable that only one such die was used. The seven coins that show on their reverses the symbol ∆ (for the fourth officina of the mint) were all struck with the same reverse die. Thus, type 1a employs a maximum of three obverse dies, but possibly only one, and three reverse dies. With only one specimen available for study, no die-links have yet been identified for type 1b.  The two specimens of type 2 are die-

| 13 | Hahn, W., Moneta Imperii Byzantini, volume 3, Heraclius to Leo III, |
|:--- |:--- |
| Vienna, 1981, plate 54. |  |
| 14 | Donald, P. J., in private correspondence with the author. |
| 15 | As well as DOC, (op. cit.), see Wroth, W., Imperial Byzantine Coins in |
| the British Museum, 1908, Morrisson, C., Catalogue des Monnaies |  |
| Byzantine de la Bibliothèque Nationale (BN), 1970. | In fact, DOC |
linked. For the group as a whole, it seems that at least six dies were used. Type 1b is an oddity. The coin is of good style and seems to have been struck with regular dies.  Like Class 1a, it is a mule. If the dies are regular, at least 10 years would have elapsed between the making of the obverse die (which names Justin I) and the reverse (which conforms to Class 4 for Justinian I, i.e., 537-539). This does not necessarily mean that the coin was struck outside of the regular mint system, however. Single dies can survive the end of production of the coins for which they were made and be used mistakenly in the striking of subsequent issues. Type 2 has a reverse for which there is no regular prototype and is fairly crudely engraved. The obverse names Anastasius. It lacks the cross placed before the Emperor's bust that occurs on products of the Antioch mint and the die used is, very probably, also irregular. ***Metrology and die-axes*** It is a pity that the data on weights are incomplete. Judging from the coins for which weights are known (which vary from just over 10 grams to nearly 15 grams) little control seems to have been exercised over the weights of the flans produced.  Thus, it seems unlikely that there was any attempt to reflect the official Byzantine weight standard. The sample is of course small. All the coins for which die-axes are known were struck at roughly ↑ ↓. ***Provenances*** Information on provenances is limited. From type 1a, coin number 4 in the catalogue formed part of a Lebanese dealer's stock; number 5 has a glossy green patina that is often associated with coins found in northern Syria, although a Lebanon provenance is also possible; number 8 was found in Bulgaria 16.  Coin number 11 (type 2) was found in the vicinity of Rafah in the Gaza Strip 17. ***The historical context*** It is suggested that some or all of these coins could have been produced in Antioch after the Persian sack of the city in mid-540 and before its reversion to Imperial control during 542-543. Those responsible for its issue might, perhaps, have been some kind of informal city council anticipating the need for a coinage to facilitate trade, albeit at a low level. During the past 15 or so years, there has been substantial work on the question of whether some of the enormous number of coins found in the Middle East that imitate regular Byzantine issues of the seventh century might be the products of unofficial mints 18. The most important, and the most relevant to this article, has been the work of Pottier on the "Syrian mint" that produced coins based on a wide variety of Byzantine prototypes during the Persian wars of Heraclius (610 - 630) in the course of which Syria was under Persian occupation for extended periods 19. A number of events following the Persian army's successful assault on Antioch's city walls in June 540 have to be considered, all of which are recorded by Procopius 20. The Persians got into the middle of the city and fought with the civilian population slaughtering many (page 335 of the Loeb edition); the survivors were captured and enslaved \[341); the Persian army, except for a small number of men ordered to fire the entire city, withdrew back

| 16 | Jekov, G., 'Two Imitations of Byzantine Copper Coins of the Sixth |
|:--- |:--- |
| Century', Numismatika 1'87 (1987), pages 22 - 25 (in Bulgarian with a |  |
| resume in French). | The article is poorly illustrated which partly accounts |
| for the quality of the reproduction here. |  |
| 17 Spaer, A., 'The Rafah Hoard - Byzantine Sixth-Century Folles', |  |
| Numismatic Chronicle, Seventh Series, Volume XVIII (1978), pages 66 - |  |
| 71, number 51. |  |
| 18 Mansfield, S. J., 'A Byzantine Irregular Mint of "Year 20"', Numismatic |  |
| Circular, April 1992, pages 81 - 82; Mansfield, S. J., and Oddy, A., 'The |  |
| "Year 20" Mint Revisited' (forthcoming); Pottier, H., 'Le Monnayage de la |  |
| Syrie sous L'Occupation Perse (610-630)', Cahiers Ernest-Babelon 9, |  |
| Paris 2004. |  |
| 19 | Pottier, 'Le Monnayage de la Syrie', (op. cit.). |
| 20 | Procopius, op. cit. |
to its encampment (343); in the ensuing fire, many houses at the extremity of the city were not in fact destroyed (345); the whole army went to Apamea (355); all the captives from Antioch were resettled in a new city close to the Persian capital at Ctesiphon (381). Are these events consistent with the possibility of an unofficial mint located in Antioch issuing an emergency coinage? Parts of the city were left standing and the Persian army withdrew. Thus, there may have been both reason and opportunity to strike a coinage. On the other hand, Procopius says that the entire population was removed. Is this likely though? Modern history suggests that the resources necessary to deport entire populations are enormous and ancient authors often appear unreliable about numbers; for example, the statement by Procopius about the extent of the earthquake death toll 21. It is quite possible that people remained in Antioch after the Persians withdrew. The case for an official mint in Antioch in 540 - 542 also rests on:
the number of dies used, suggesting organised and coherent activity; the presence on the coins of the θ Y Π O Λ S mint signature used on regular Byzantine issues at Antioch about a year, and perhaps only a few months, before the capture of the city by the Persians.

The obverses on the coins show not the iconography of the reformed folles of Justinian but the anachronistic designs of Justin I, and, particularly, of Anastasius I, both of whom are clearly named. In relation to the Syrian mint during the Persian occupation of 610-630, Pottier 22 was able to demonstrate that, in their choice of designs, the issuers were sensitive to the prevailing political situation and, at times when the Persians were more strongly placed locally, they struck coins based on pre-Heraclian prototypes. He had at his disposal a large body of coins and his treatment of the metrology was meticulous. The arguments that can be assembled here for an irregular mint operating 70 years earlier are far more slight. There are similarities, nonetheless, and credit should be given to Tony Goodwin for suggesting to me that a parallel exists 23. At risk of stating the obvious, coins showing the current Emperor Justinian in a martial pose would not be acceptable to a Persian army which, if not actually occupying the city, was still well placed, for some months at least, to intervene.

| 573/574.24 | All we have is what can be drawn from just the 12 |
|:--- |:--- |
| coins described here. Coins might still have been needed even in a |  |
| despoiled and partly depopulated city. The local economy was |  |
| probably shattered but human nature is such that people will |  |
| continue to do business. Whoever produced the coins may have |  |
| used both redundant regular dies drawn from the old official mint |  |
| and new dies made by local artisans. In both cases, care seems to |  |
| have been taken not to offend the Persians - whose permission to |  |
| strike a coinage may have been needed - by portraying the |  |
| Emperor with whom they were still at war. The best indication for |  |
| activity of this kind rests with the type 1a coins for which at least |  |
| three reverse dies were apparently made. |  |
| There are no die-links between the three types. Type 1b might |  |
| be excluded completely on the basis that it could be the result of |  |
| poor management practice at the regular mint at a completely |  |
| different time. Type 2 is known from only one pair of dies and |  |
| could have been produced under different circumstances although |  |
| it is interesting that the reverse, without drawing completely on |  |
| any regular prototype, has the | θYΠOΛS mint signature. |
| The provenances present some difficulty for what is predicated |  |
| as a local Syrian coinage. One example of type 1a was found in |  |
| Bulgaria and one of type 2 in Gaza. But this is not necessarily |  |
| inconsistent with the partial depopulation of Antioch and the |  |
| dispersal of its former inhabitants. |  |
| It can reasonably be suggested that the enigmatic coinage that |  |
| is type 1, and possibly types 1b and 2 also, might have made to |  |
| meet a short-term, local, need and which could, plausibly, be fixed |  |
| within the historical context of conditions in the city of Antioch in |  |
| the months following June 540. If so, the claim made by Procopius |  |
| that the city was emptied of its population might be wrong. He |  |
| records that the city was not entirely destroyed. Little more can be |  |
| advanced with confidence about the coins since other explanations |  |
| are possible and might, sometime in the future, be made. |  |
|. |  |
| 21 | Procopius, op. cit., Book II, xiv, page 383. |
| 22 | Pottier, 'Le Monnayage de la Syrie', (op. cit.). |
| 23 | Goodwin, T., in private correspondence with the author. |
| 24 | Spaer, 'The Rafah Hoard', (op. cit.). | Annex A:  Catalogue **Type 1a**

1.  Officina A Obverse die uncertain Reverse die a1 Observed in trade in 1986 (i)

2.  Officina B Obverse die A1 Reverse die b1 Private collection no. 1

3.  Officina ∆ Obverse die A2 Reverse die c1 Private collection no. 1
4.  Officina ∆ Obverse die A3 Reverse die c2 14.67 gms; 180 o Private collection no. 2

5.  Officina ∆ Obverse die A4 Reverse die c3 10.28 gms; 200 o Private collection no. 2

6.  Officina ∆ Obverse die A5 Reverse die c4 13.46 gms; 180 o - O. 213

7.  Officina ∆ Obverse die A6 Reverse die c5 MIIB 131 1 8.  Officina ∆ Obverse die A7 Reverse die c6

9.  Officina ∆ Obverse die uncertain (ii) Reverse die c7 10.03 gms; 180 Private collection no. 3 **Type 1b** 10. Officina ∆. MIB N131 2 **Type 2**

11.  Officina A Same dies as no. 12 9.94 gms; 180 Private collection no. 2
12.  Officina A Same dies as no. 11 Rafah Hoard, no. 51 (iii)

(i) I observed this coin in Baldwins' trays in 1986.  For reasons that make little sense now, I recorded few details and I was unable to photograph the coin.  I was convinced that the reverse die was that used to strike D. O. 213a.  It seems very likely that the obverse was also die-linked to the rest of the series, but my notes say only "obverse die-link?". (ii) The obverse of this coin is certainly similar to the coins struck with die A but the reproduction is not good enough to establish a definitive die link. (iii) Numismatic Chronicle, 1978, The Rafah Hoard (op. cit). **NEW MINT NAMES FOR A MARINID** **HALF DIRHAM TYPE** By Ludovic Liétard

This article concerns the silver coinage of the last Marinid sultan, 'Abd al- Ḥ aqq II, who ruled in Morocco from AD 1420 to 1465 ( AH 823 - 869). He issued various types of dirhams and fractions of dirhams (\[1\], \[2\], \[3\]), exclusively struck in north Morocco, the known mint names being: A ṣī l ā (another spelling is A ṣī lah), F ā s, Meknes (Mekn ā sa), and T ā za. Recently, in his PhD dissertation, El Hadri \[2\] published some new types for half dirhams issued by this ruler. He was the first and only person to describe these types and this article focuses on one of them. Coins of this type bear on the obverse side the end of verse 2 of sura 65 of the Qur'an ("And whoever fears Allah, He will make for him a way out"). The reverse side bears the mint name and the name of 'Abd al- Ḥ aqq with the title of Commander of the Muslims. The reported mint names are F ā s (El Hadri 402) and A ṣī l ā (A ṣī lah) (El Hadri 403). This article completes the description of this type by showing three other mintnames: Meknes (Mekn ā sa), T ā za and S ā la (also spelt Sla, or Salé). Section 1 is devoted to the description of the type while section 2 introduces the three new mint names. ***1. Description of the type under consideration*** The type we are interested in can be illustrated by the following half dirham (coin 1, 0.83 g., 14 x 16.5 mm, El Hadri 403) struck in A ṣī l ā ( G,) اصي also named A ṣī lah.

*Fig. 1 (coin 1): a half dirham (obverse) struck * * by 'Abd al-* Ḥ *aqq II  in A* ṣī *l* ā * (El Hadri 403) * * * *Obverse of coin 1 (Quran 65:2)*: و من يتق ﷲا يجعل لة مخرجا This obverse bears the end of verse 2 of sura 65 of the Qur'an and can be translated by "And whoever fears Allah, He will make for him a way out". The reverse is described below.

*Fig. 2 (coin 1): a half dirham (reverse) struck * * by 'Abd al-* Ḥ *aqq II in A* ṣī *l* ā * (El Hadri 403) * * * *Reverse of coin 1*: عبد الحق اصيG امير المسلمين The reverse legend can be translated as "Abd al- Ḥ aqq, A ṣī l ā, Commander of the Muslims". The mint name A ṣī l ā ( G ) اصي can be observed on the reverse:

*Fig. 3: the mint name A* ṣī *l* ā * * ***2. Additional mints for this type*** The next three coins (coins 2, coin 3 and coin 4) show that this type can also be found with the mint names Meknes (Mekn ā sa), T ā za and S ā la. All these coins bear the same obverse legend as coin 1 (the end of verse 2 of sura 65 of the Qur'an) so its transcription and translation are not repeated here. *2.1 The mint name Meknes (Mekn* ā *sa) * Coin 2 (0.81 g, 13 x 15.5 mm, fig. 4) shows Meknes (Mekn ā sa) as the mint name.

*Fig. 4 (coin 2): a half dirham  * *struck by 'Abd al-* Ḥ *aqq II  in Meknes *
* * * * *Reverse of coin 2*: عبد الحق مكناسة امير المسلمين The reverse legend is the same as on coin 1, except for the mint name. It can be translated as "'Abd al- Ḥ aqq, Meknes, Commander of the Muslims". The mint name Meknes (Mekn ā sa) ( ) مكناسة can be observed on the reverse:

*Fig. 5: the mint name Meknes (Mekn* ā *sa) * *2.2 The mint name T* ā *za * Coin 3 (0.85 g, 15 x 14 mm, fig. 6) shows T ā za as the mint name.

*Fig. 6 (coin 3): a half dirham struck * *by 'Abd al-* Ḥ *aqq II in T* ā *za * * * *Reverse of coin 3*: عبد الحق تازة امير المسلمين The reverse legend is the same as on coin 1, except for the mint name. It can be translated as "'Abd al- Ḥ aqq, T ā za, Commander of the Muslims". The mint name T ā za ( ) تازة can be observed on the reverse:

*Fig. 7: the mint name T* ā *za * It should be noticed that this spelling of T ā za ( ) تازة differs from
the spelling ( ) تازى already reported by Arroyo \[1\] for another type of silver coin issued by 'Abd al- Ḥ aqq II. According to Arroyo, the spelling  تازة is encountered more often and is more
correct than ( تازى see \[1\] page 119 for a short discussion about these two spellings). *2.3 The mint name S* ā *la * Coin 4 (0.67 g, 16 x 16 mm, fig. 8) shows S ā la (S ā lé) as mint name.

*Fig. 8 (coin 4): a half dirham struck * *by 'Abd al-* Ḥ *aqq II in S* ā *la (S* ā *lé) * * * *Reverse of coin 4*: عبد الحق سG امير المسلمين Again, the reverse legend is the same as on coin 1, except for the mint name. It can be translated as "'Abd al- Ḥ aqq, S ā la, Commander of the Muslims". The mint name S ā la ( G ) س can be seen on the reverse:

*Fig. 9: the mint name S* ā *la * ***3. Conclusion*** In this article, we have described a type of Marinid half dirham struck by the Marinid ruler, 'Abd al- Ḥ aqq II. This type was described in El Hadri's recent PhD dissertation \[2\] with the mint names F ā s (El Hadri 402) and A ṣī l ā (A ṣī lah) (El Hadri 403). Here, we have expanded the description of this type by showing three other mint names: Meknes, T ā za and S ā la (also named Sl ā or S ā lé).

*Fig. 10: a simplified map of northern Morocco * Furthermore, it is the first time that the mint name of S ā la is reported on a coin along with the name of 'Abd al- Ḥ aqq II. *References *

\[1\] Arroyo, Henri. 'Un trésor de dirhams de la fin de l'empire mérinide', *Revue Numismatique*, VI° série, Tome XVI, 1974, 115-122. \[2\] El Hadri, Mohamed. *Les monnaies mérinides dans l'histoire monétaire * *du Maroc (13* *ème* * - 15* *ème* * siècle)*, Thèse de doctorat d'Histoire, Université Lumière-Lyon II (France), 2007. \[3\] Hohertz, Edmund. *A catalog of the square islamic coins of Spain, * *Portugal, and North Africa, 1130-1816 A.D.*, The Wooster Book Company, 2008.
**A NEW TYPE FOR MARINID OR EARLY** **WATTASID SILVER COINAGE** By Ludovic Liétard The Marinid dynasty ruled in western north Africa from AH 614 to AH 869 ( AD 1217-1465) and then, in Morocco, they were succeeded by the Wattasid dynasty ( AH 831-946 or AD 14281549). The silver coinage of both dynasties consists of dirhams, half dirhams, and quarter dirhams. This article introduces a new type of Marinid or early Watassid silver coins. In the beginning of the 1970's, 183 silver coins from the same hoard were studied and dated to the end of the Marinid dynasty by Arroyo \[1\]. This hoard was discovered near Meknes in northern Morocco and consisted of several thousand coins (of which only 183 coins were studied). Most of the 183 specimens studied by Arroyo can be attributed to the last Marinid sultan, 'Abd al- Ḥ aqq II ( AH 823-869 / AD 14201465). A few of the coins discovered can be attributed to the period of instability, between the Marinids and the following dynasty (the Watassids). These latter coins are the most recent of the 183 coins studied and Arroyo concluded that the hoard dates from the very end of the Marinid dynasty. Fig. 1 depicts a half dirham (0.81 g and 12 x 15 mm) of a type defined by Arroyo from the Meknes hoard (Arroyo \[1\] figure 2, Hohertz \[3\] 304, Mitchiner \[4\] 506). ** **

*Fig. 1 (coin 1): a half dirham listed by Arroyo * *Obverse*: امامنا ﷲا تعا لى *Reverse*: ضرب بمدينة اصيG The obverse can be translated by "Our leader is / God / May He be exalted" and the reverse by "Struck / in the town of / A ṣī l ā ". The mint town is A ṣī l ā ( G,) اصي situated in the north of Morocco. I have recently obtained some different silver coins which were bought in the Meknes area during the 1970's. They are similar to coin 1 (Arroyo figure 2) and they bring to light a new type of silver coin to be added to the corpus of Moroccan coins. *** *** ***The new type*** Five coins of this new type have been identified and are illustrated as coins 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 below. **  ** *Fig. 2 (coin 2) * * *

*Obverse*: امامنا ﷲا تعا لى *Reverse*: G اصي امامنا ﷲا ** ** The obverse can be translated by "Our leader is / God / May He be exalted" and the reverse by "A ṣī l ā / Our leader is / God". Other coins sharing the same type are described hereafter.

## Fig. 3 (coin 3)

*Obverse*: امامنا ﷲا تعا... *Reverse*: G اصي امامنا ﷲا

## Fig. 4 (coin 4)

*Obverse*: امامنا ﷲا تعا لى *Reverse*: G اصي امامنا....

## Fig. 5 (coin 5) *Obverse*: امامنا ﷲا.... ---
** ** *Rev.*: In the centre a fragment of standard legend B 35: "A ¾Ìmi / fÀZ¿ "A / ÜA É»A Ü
with ÆAÌVbÃ above (some unclear graphemes to the right). The whole surrounded by a circle of dots (visible at 12 o'clock). Both sides seem to have been struck from dirham dies, and not from specially designed dies of a smaller diameter. The obverse of this coin seems to supply a die match with the AH 64x Nakhjawan dirhams published in the earlier work 36; the reverse was struck with a previously unknown die 37. Now, with the discovery of this hitherto unique smaller denomination coin from the mint of Nakhjawan, it would seem that at least 3 mints out of 16 (?) issued both dirham and halfdirham denominations ( *Table 1* ). In our opinion, the striking of the smaller denomination may have been relatively common, at least for this series, perhaps more common than one may think judging by the extant specimens, as fewer smaller denominations might have survived compared to the dirham denomination. ** ** *References: * 1.  Vardanyan A. "Some additions to the coins with the inscription "Ulugh Mangyl Ulus Bek". *Journal of the Oriental Numismatic * *Society*, 190, 2007. P. 7-20. **Table 1. Mints and dates for the coins of Ulu** gh gh gh gh **Mangyl Ulus** **Bek type.** **Mint name** **Dirham** **½** **Dirham** **Year (AH)**

| Akhlāt | X | 64x (in/after 643) |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Bākūya | X |? |
| Barzand | X | 64x | B ā k ū ya X? Barzand X 64x Bawonq X Baylaq ā n X

| Dmanīs | X | 6xx (64x?) |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Ganja | X | 642-643 |
| Kīrān/Gīlān | X | 6xx (64x?) |
| Lachīn/Lāchīn | X |? | Ganja X 642-643 K ī r ā n/G ī l ā n X 6xx (64x?) Lach ī n/L ā ch ī n X? Lashkar X Nakhjaw ā n X X\* Sh'ab ā n 642, 643 Tabr ī z X X Tifl ī s X

| Urmiya | X? |? |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Warthān | X | X |
| Wirāwī/Warāwī | X |? | Warth ā n X X Wir ā w ī /War ā w ī X?

## \* - New discovery ** ** ** ** ** **

35 *Ibid.:8 * 36 *Ibid.:12-13. * 37 Cf. *Ibid.*

**THE MONGOL CONQUEST OF BALKH** **ACCORDING TO NUMISMATIC** **SOURCES** **38** ** ** ** **By Anton Grachev (Moscow)** ** ** ** **Introduction** The historical events which happened during the Mongol conquest of Mawerannahr, Khorasan and northern Afghanistan have so far not been studied in detail. It is paradoxical, but many researchers in this area have limited themselves to a description of chronology taken from known sources (Rashid al-Din, Juvaini) and have ignored contradictions in dates and variants of events. For example, in Buniyatov's book we can see various dates and descriptions of the capture of Marw on one page. 39 Contradictions in dates, and variants of events in the written sources cause problems and raise questions regarding the correct reconstruction of the chronology of the mongol conquest. One such question is that of the chronology of the mongol conquest of Balkh. ** ** **Analysis of sources** The Mongols captured Balkh in two stages according to some written sources (Juvaini, Juzjani, Rashid al-Din). In early AH 617 ( AD 1220/1221), when the Mongols laid siege to Samarqand, Chingiz Khan sent a band of troops in pursuit of Mu ḥ ammad Khw ā rizmsh ā h. 40 In command of the pursuing troops were Sabuday Bah ā dur and Jebe. The Mongols arrived at Balkh in the middle of the spring of AH 617. The nobles and leaders of the city came out to the troops with various gifts. The Mongols appointed a *shihna* (governor) for the town and took guides with them for the campaign in Khorasan. When Chingiz Khan began his own campaign in Afghanistan, the scenario for the capture of Balkh was similar. The nobles and leaders of the city came out to Chingiz Khan and presented gifts but Chingiz Khan did not accept their surrender. He ordered all the inhabitants to leave the city and sent them into the fields, where, according to Juvaini and Rashid al-Din, they were  all killed. Then,  Balkh itself was destroyed. 41 This version of events has been used by most researchers in their works. 42 In other written sources (Ibn Asir, Yuan-Shi), nothing is mentioned about the first surrender of Balkh. The narrative begins with the campaign of Tolu at the end of  AH 617. 43 The description of Chingiz Khan's campaign described by Ibn Asir is similar to the events of the first surrender of Balkh in Juvaini and Rashid alDin, but in Ibn Asir's annals there is no information about the murder of the inhabitants and the destruction of city. Ibn Asir only mentions that some inhabitants of Balkh press-ganged into the "khashar" (irregular troops made up of slaves) for the capture of Marw. 44 During the analysis of written sources  some questions arise: - Why did the nobles of the city come out with various gifts a  second time, if there was a Mongol governor in Balkh? - When did the Mongols finally capture Balkh?  - Why did Chingiz Khan decide to destroy the city and kill the  inhabitants despite their voluntary surrender? For the answer to these and other questions we need to use additional sources, which can give information about the actual chronology of events. The additional sources in this case are coins. Coins are a unique source of information because they contain data about the date of issue, the mint of issue and the name of 38 I wish to thank Dr Vladimir Nastich and Dr Vadim Trepavlov for their help in translating the inscriptions of the coins 39 Bunijatov 1986, p. 154. 40 According to Juzjani, it was in Rabi' ul-Awwal 617  (May, AD 1200), see Juzjani, p. 988. 41 Juvayn ī, pp.130-132, 143; Rashid al-Din, p.218. 42 Pikulin 1977, p.142; Kolbas, p.37. 43 Yan-Shi,  p. 157. 44 Ibn Asir, p.361
rulers (and/or their titles). Indeed, at that time it was the tradition that invaders minted coins with the name of the conquering ruler whenever a city surrendered. Using data from coins, we can determine when Balkh was captured. To do this, we need to compare the last year of coins issued by the previous ruler and the first year of coins issued by the next ruler. According to historical chronicles, Balkh was incorporated into the Khw ā rizmsh ā h state in AH 608, before the Mongol conquest. Balkh at that time had an organised coinage, consisting of  jitals, silver-washed copper dirhams and gold dinars. As far as we know, the latest date for Khw ā rizmsh ā h coins struck in Balkh is AH 616. 45 The Mongols began to strike coins in Balkh from AH 618 ( AD 1221/1222). These were silver-washed copper dirhams without the name of the ruler, but containing, in the inscriptions, mention of the name of N āṣ ir al-D ī n, the caliph in Baghdad, and the "khani" epithet (which means  - \[coin\] of the khan) 46. By using this information about dates of Khw ā rizmsh ā h coins and Mongol coins we can define the time slot when the city was captured to between AH 616 and 618. However, there are coins in the name of malik Ab ū 'l-Ma ḥā mid Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī struck at Balkh. The year these coins were struck is not certain because of  the unclear style of engraving. In well-known books, different dates are stated for the year of minting: for example, in Album's Checklist it is AH 617, but in "Sylloge Numorum Arabicorum Tübingen" the year of minting is stated as AH 619. 47 The question arises: who is this malik and when were the coins struck with his name? Mention of  this malik is absent in the main written sources (Juvaini, Rashid al-Din, Ibn Asir). However, in alNasavi we find mention of some person with the name - "A' ẓ am Malik" in the section where  the arrival of Jal ā l al-D ī n in Ghazna in AH  618 is described. 48 The important point is that the "A' ẓ am Malik" mentioned in al-Nasavi is thes "malik of Balkh". If we turn to numismatic resources, we can find out that the full titles of Malik Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usain ī read as "Malik al-a' ẓ am al-'adl..." Therefore, we have two interesting facts: - The titles of Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī from the coins  coincide with the name of the person from al-Nasavi. - Both these characters ruled Balkh during the period from  AH 617 to 618. Based on these facts we can draw the conclusion that Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī, who struck coins in Balkh and "Malik ala' ẓ am" from al-Nasavi's annals are one and the same person. Using this conclusion we can answer the question about the date of minting of Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī 's coins. The date can only be AH 617. An additional argument in favour of this view is the fact that "A' ẓ am-Malik" in AH 618 accompanied Jal ā l al-D ī n to southern Afghanistan and then, according al-Nasavi's annals, went to the mountains near Kabul. In Darwaz castle in the mountains, "A' ẓ am Malik" fought against the Mongols and probably died. 49 We can also reconstruct the chronology of the Mongol conquest of Balkh. Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī became ruler of Balkh after Mu ḥ ammad bin Tekesh Khw ā rizmsh ā h left Khw ā rizm. Unfortunately we do not have any details of how he actually became the ruler. In AH 617 he took the decisive step, having broken off relations with the Khw ā rizmsh ā h, to have coins struck in his own name. He probably took this decisive step because he agreed to become a vassal of the Mongols when Sabuday's army passed close to Balkh. Attention should be paid to type MH-2a of Mu ḥ ammad alḤ usayn ī coins. This type contain the ancient Turki word

45 Lebedev&Petrov 1997, pp.163-165 46 SNAT, pp.102-104. 47 Album 1998, p.88; SNAT, p.104. 48 Nasavi, p. 119. 49 Ibid - p.123.

"Turghaq" which mean "watchman, guard". 50 This word is probably the key to the puzzling history of Mu ḥ ammad alḤ usayn ī 's rule in Balkh. According to Juvaini, Chingiz Khan spent the summer of AD 1220 ( AH 617) at Narshab, after the capture of Samarqand. From there he began a campaign against Tirmidh in the autumn of that same year. The capture of the city was delayed and Chengiz Khan had to spend the winter in the area, in the region of Kungrat and Shuman. 51 Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī decided to join to Jal ā l al-Din, and probably left Balkh at the end of the winter of  AH 617. We can suppose that Mu ḥ ammad al- Ḥ usayn ī received information  about the situation in Mawerannahr from refugees and concluded that any attempt to defend the city would be futile. Apparently he chose to join to Jal ā l al-Din, rather than be killed during the storming of the city. Balkh was captured in the early spring of AH 618; the exact date is unknown. As we know, after the surrender of the city, Chenghiz Khan ordered the city to be destroyed and the inhabitants killed. But these events contradict the data from numismatic sources, because we now know coins struck in Balkh dated AH 618 and 619. Which raises the question: what point would there have been in minting coins in a ruined city, without any inhabitants? Usually, an active coinage was used for economic revival and the support of trade  in conjunction with a taxation policy. 52 In a town where the bazaars and trading have been destroyed, and the people taken into slavery, a coinage no longer makes sense. But, during AH 618-619 ( AD 1221-1223) we can observe changes from one type of coin to another. For this period we can identify, in all, four types of coins, which indicates the existence of an active financial and fiscal policy. E.A. Davidovich in her own works comes to the conclusion that the minting of several types of coins in a short time-frame  was for the acquisition of additional income via  the forced exchange of the "old" type of coins for the "new" types. 53 But, what events are described in Juvayni and Rashid al-Din's annals? They are probably guilty of conflating different events into one single event. In Bartold's work "Turkestan Down to the Mongol Invasion" it is mentioned that Balkh was destroyed later, in consequence of the rebellion of the inhabitants, according to Ibn Asir's annals. 54 But Bartold does not provide the precise reference for this in Ibn Asir's work. A subsequent search in the Chinese annals  "The Travels of an Alchemist, the Journey of the Taoist Ch'ang-Ch'un from China to the Hindukush at the Summons of Chingiz Khan" has provided an interesting result. Ch'ang-Ch'un writes, "We passed the great city of Balkh. Its inhabitants had recently rebelled against the Khan and been removed, but we could still hear dogs barking in its streets". 55 Ch'ang-Ch'un travelled through Balkh in the middle of autumn AD 1222 ( AH 619), so the anti-Mongol rebellion probably took place in the summer of that year. These events are confirmed by the lack of coinage for AH 620 in Balkh. However, the city was not abandoned. After some time, coinage resumed in the city. We know of silver-washed copper coins which were probably struck in the following two decades and silver coins struck in AH 640, thus providing evidence of attempts to re-activate some form of economic life in the city. 56 Marco Polo, who passed Balkh in the 70 S of the 13 th century 57, described Balkh as a big city with an active urban life. But Marco Polo also mentioned many destroyed houses and palaces in the city. 58 This means that Balkh was revived after some time but was

50 "Drevneturkskiy slovar", p. 120 51 Juvayn ī, p. 129 52 Kolbas 2006, pp.35-40; Petrov 2010, p. 139. 53 Davidovich 1972, pp. 37-49. 54 Bartold, 1963  p.506. 55 Ch'ang-Ch'un, p.111. 56 SNAT, p.104 57 The certain date is unknown 58 Marko Polo, p.220
not able to attain the level of pre-Mongol urban development and trade. ** ** ***Coin catalogue*** **Coins of  Mu** ḥ **ammad b. Tekish**

***Type MT-1. (Fig. 1)  Mint: Balkh; Date:*** ***AH*** ***616*** *References:ZENO 9273, 69306 * *Obverse:* Inscription in a plain circle 

##       

##        

## Marginal legend    !" # $% & ' ()\* +\*

## Reverse: Inscription in the plain circle & 

## ,-.    !. 	!

## ). ,  *Marginal legend*: Qur'an, IX, 33

*Fig. 1.  Reconstruction of Mu* ḥ *ammad b. Tekish dirham, Balkh * *mint, * *AH * *616 * **Coins of  Mu** ḥ **ammad al-** Ḥ **usayn** ī ** **

***Type MH-1. (Fig. 2)  Mint: Balkh; Date:*** ***AH*** ***617*** *References:SNAT 861-863; ZENO 19861, 72121 *

## Obverse: Inscription in a star-shaped cartouche  /, 

## 0, 1       

## Reverse: Inscription in a plain circle $,# 2, 

## ,-.  $$ $)  $$

## Marginal legend    !" # $% & ' ()\* 3'\*

*Fig. 2.  Reconstruction of type MH-1 * *** *** ***Type MH-2a. (Fig. 3)  Mint: Balkh; Date:*** ***AH*** ***617*** *References:SNAT 858-860; ZENO 22617, 58722, 67855, 89721; * *ANS 1917.216.393 *

## Obverse In a central square cartouche: #?

## Around the central square cartouche  /, 

## 1   0,

##     

## In the top segments 567

*Reverse: * In a central square cartouche: 2, 

## ,-.  $$ $)  $$

## Marginal legend    !" # $% & ' ()\* 3'\*

*Fig. 3. Reconstruction of type MH-2a * *** *** ***Type MH-2b. Mint: Balkh; Date:*** ***AH*** ***617*** *References: SNAT 857 *

*Obverse: * In a central square cartouche: $ 8

Inscription а round the central square cartouche as on type MH-2b In the top segments:  two dots

*Reverse:* Inscription in the central square cartouche and marginal legend as on MH-2b * * **Mongol coins**

***Type MN-1. (Fig. 4)  Mint: Balkh; Date:*** ***AH*** ***618*** *References:SNAT 847-851;  ZENO 5655, 7677, 41770,* *64544, * *89365; ANS 1927.179.19, 1971.89.21 *
*Obverse: * In a central circular cartouche: $ 9!:) ;   )., !, 

In the segments:!" (!)   /   / # $% & ' / ()\*!@ 	,A

*Reverse: * In the central cartouche: ;  

#  ,-.; ;  B\* *Marginal legend*: Qur'an, IX, 33

*Fig. 4. Reconstruction of type MN-1 * *** *** ***Type MN-2. (Fig. 5)  Mint: Balkh; Date:*** ***AH*** ***618*** *References:SNAT  853,854; ZENO 72123 *

*Obverse: * In a central circular cartouche: $ 9!:) ;   )., !, 

In the segments:!" (!)   /   / # $% & ' / ()\*!@ 	,A

*Reverse: * In the central cartouche: ;    ,-.; 

#;  B\*

*Fig. 5. Reconstruction of type MN-2 * * * *** *** *** ***

***Type MN-3. (Fig. 6)  Mint: Balkh; Date: AH 618*** *References: SNAT 852 * *Obverse: * In the central cartouche: $ 9 1  C.  !:)  , !, ;  ).

*Reverse:* Inscription in a plain circle: * * ;  

#  ,-.; ;  B\*

*Marginal legend*:!"      # $% & ' ()\* ,\*!@ 	,A

*Fig. 6. Reconstruction of type MN-3 * * * ***Type MN-4. (Fig. 7)  Mint: Balkh; Date: not visible, but*** ***probably*** ***AH*** ***619*** *References:SNAT 855, 856 *

*Obverse: * Inscription in a plain circle: * * $ 9

#  C.  )  1;  !: *Marginal legend*:... # $% & ' ()\*...

*Reverse:* Inscription in a plain circle: * * ;  

#  ,-.; ;  B\* *Fig. 7. Reconstruction of type MN-4 * * * --- *References: *

| 1. Album 1998: | S. Album, A Checklist of Islamic Coins, 1998 |
|:--- |:--- |
| 2. Bartold 1963: V.V.Bartold, Turkestan v epohu mongolskogo |  |
| nashestvija, vol.1, Moscow, 1963 (see also V.V.Bartold Turkestan |  |
| Down to the Mongol Invasion (London: Luzac & Co) 1928). |  |
| 3. Bunijatov 1986: Z.M. Bunijatov, Gosudarstvo Horezmshahov- |  |
| Anushtegenidov, 1097-1231, Moscow, 1986. |  |
| 4. Ch'ang-Ch'un: The Travels of an Alchemist, The Journey of the Taoist |  |
| Ch'ang-Ch'un from China to the Hindukush at the Summons of |  |
| Chingiz Khan, Hardcover, 2008. |  |
| 5. Davidovich 1972: E.A. Davidovich, "Denezhnoe hozjaystvo Srednei |  |
| Azii posle mongol'skogo zavoevanija I reforma Mas'ud-beka", |  |
| Moscow, 1972. |  |
| 6. Drevneturkskiy slovar - "Drevneturkskiy slovar" (ancient Turk |  |
| dictionary), Leningrad, 1969. |  |
| 7. Ibn Asir: Ibn Asir, "al-Kamil fi't-Tarih" (Russian translation), |  |
| Tashkent, 2006. |  |
| 8. Juvaini: ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAṭā Malik Juvaynī, "Genghis Khan: The History |  |
| of the World Conqueror", Manchester University Press, 1997. |  |
| 9. Juzjani: | Juzjani "Tabakat-i-Nasiri: A General History of the |
| Muhammadan Dynasties of Asia". - London, 1881. |  |
| 10. | Kolbas 2006: J.G. Kolbas, "The Mongols in Iran: Chingiz Khan to |
| Uljaytu, 1220-1309". - Routledge, 2006. |  |
| 11. Lebedev & Petrov 1997: V.P. Lebedev, | P.N.Petrov, "Dva klada |
| mednih poserebrennyh dirhemov Horezmshaha 'Ala ad-Dina |  |
| Muhammada |  |
| ben |  |
| Tekesha |  |
| (1200-1220)" |  |
| // |  |
| Drevnosti |  |
| Nizhegorodskogo Povolzhja i drugih regionov. Vipusk II, tom I. |  |
| Nizhniy Novgorod, 1997 |  |
| 12. Nasavi: | Shikhab ad-Din Mukhammad an-Nasavi, "Sirat as-Sultan |
| Dzhalal ad-Din Mankburny" (Zhizneopisanie Sultana Dzhalal ad- |  |
| Dina Mankburny), Moscow, 1996. |  |
| 13. Marco Polo: Marko Polo, "Putishestvie v vostochnie strany. Kniga |  |
| Marka Polo"// "Kniga o raznoobrozii mira", Moscow, 1997. (see also |  |
| "The travels of Marco Polo", | by Hugh Murray, Oliver & Boyd, 1845) |
| 14. Pikulin 1977: M.G.Pikulin "Chingiz-Khan v Afganistane" in Tatari- |  |
| mongoli v Azii I Evrope - Moscow, 1977. |  |
| 15. | Petrov 2010: P.N.Petrov "Klad iz Dev-resen-kala I voprosi nachala |
| chekanki |  |
| serebrjannih |  |
| monet |  |
| v |  |
| juchidskom |  |
| uluse", |  |
| in |  |
| Zolotoordynskaja civilizacija, Kazan, 2010. |  |
| 16. | Rashid ad-Din: Rashid ad-Din, Jami al-Tawarikh (Russian |
| translation), vol. 1, part 2, Leningrad, 1952. |  |
| 17. SNAT: F. Schwarz Sylloge Numorum Arabicorum Tübingen. XIVc |  |
| Hurasan III: Balh und die Landschaften am oberen Oxus, Tübingen, |  |
| Berlin: Wasmuth, 2002 |  |
| 18. Yan-Shi: | Zolotaja orda v istochnikah, vol.III., Kitaiskie I mongolskie |
| istochniki (Golden horde in annals, vol.III, "Chinese and Mongol |  |
| annals"), Moscow, 2009 |  |
| 19. ANS: | http://numismatics.org/collection/accnum/list |
| 20. ZENO: | http://zeno.ru |
| THE ARCHAIC PUNCH-MARKED COINS |  |
| OF KUKAḌI, MINĀ RIVER VALLEY. |  |
| PART | I: (DISCOVERY AND SUMMARY |
| OF THE COINS) |  |
| By Amol N. Bankar, Pune |  |
| Background |  |
| Junnar, surrounded by several Buddhist rock-cut temples, is |  |
| situated on the right bank of the river Kukḍi (Coordinates: 19°12' |  |
| N, 73°56' E) and is about ninety kilometers north of Pune. | It lies |
| in a broad valley of the Sahyādri ranges about 2000 feet above |  |
| sea-level. Junnar is forty kilometers from Nāņeghāț, the ancient |  |
| trade route through which it was linked with the ancient port cities |  |
| of Sopārā, Kalyān, Ćaul and through which it linked these port |  |
| cities to Pratiśțhāna, the capital of the Sātavāhanas. | It thus |
therefore, utilised equally by transient traders and workers. Its location was also ideal for agriculture. It is situated in the fertile valley of the Min ā and Kuk ḍ i rivers, tributaries of the river Gho ḍ. Additionally, the Sahy ā dri ranges provided defensive hideouts.

*Figs. 1 & 2: Entrance to N* āņ *egh* āț * pass and a huge stone jar at its * *entrance  * The ancient name of Junnar is the subject of great debate; in the past, most scholars derived the name Junnar from the Sanskrit * * word ' *Jir* ņ *a-nagara'* meaning 'old/ruined city or town'. But Dr Suresh Vasant Jadhav suggested the etymology of the name Junnar was ' *Yavananagara'* and that it was inhabited by YavanaGreek merchants. Also, Laeuchli identified ' *Omenagara'* mentioned by Ptolemy and *'Umehanakata'* which occurs in one of the Karla inscriptions with Junnar. 1 The copper-plate inscription of Sinda King Adityavarman dated Ś aka Era 887 ( AD 965) mentions ' *Junnanagara* ' (old city or town) as the name of Junnar. 2

Ancient tracks can still be seen around Junnar and two rockcut cisterns have been found on the road leading to Junnar. On both sides of the last milestone for N āņ egh āț from Junnar, remains of a number of cisterns have been found. On one side is a large platform with ashlar masonry. Near the parapet is a massive jar hewn out of rock which is said to have been used for collecting toll money and, on the opposite hill, is a small shrine to Gane ś a. The inscribed cave at the head of the N āņ egh āț, linking the hinterland to the coast, records, among other things, gifts such as cows, horses, elephants, villages and money donated by queen N ā ga ņ ik ā during the Vedic sacrifices conducted by her. N āņ egh āț
has also yielded many label inscriptions and low relief sculptures of members of the S ā tav ā hana dynasty like Simuka, the founder of the S ā tav ā hana dynasty; Siri S ā takar ņ i, his wife, N ā ga ņ ik ā; her father, Tranakayira, and her sons, Hakusiri and S ā tav ā hana. 3 The author undertook several explorations in Junnar and collected pottery, roof tiles and other antiquities of the S ā tav ā hana period. ** **

*Fig. 3: N* āņ *egh* āț * Inscription of Queen N* ā *ga* ņ *ik* ā *, wife of * *S* ā *takar* ņ *i  I * In the year 2009, post-monsoon heavy rain-falls led to the discovery of some archaic punch-marked coins from the Kuk ḍ i and Min ā rivers near Junnar. When the water level reduced, the local coin-hunters undertook searches at some unreported locations in these two rivers. Previously, these rivers had been infrequently mentioned in any epigraphical records or ancient texts, except for the single reference of a Ś aiva shrine at the village of Pur at the source of the river Kuk ḍ i, presently known as Kuka ḍ e ś vara, built by the Ś il ā h ā ra king Jha ṅ ja at the base of the hill fort of Ch ā wa ṅḍ (also known as Ju ṅḍ a or Prasannga ḍ ), which is cited in one copperplate inscription of the Ś il ā h ā ras of North Konkan.  The purpose of this paper is to record the coins that were found at the town of Junnar and its vicinity. The locations of the exact find spots are kept secret by the finders of the coins. With the exception of a few types reported earlier from some private collections (see figs 4 & 5) 4 and a few published varieties **5**, no coins of similar types were known through any excavations.  Most of the coins recorded in this paper were discovered during 2009 with a few being seen and also being recorded for the first time. It is estimated that more than 326  coins were discovered but, unfortunately, before the present author came to know about the discovery, the coins had been distributed amongst various coin dealers and sold to coin collectors. The coins published in this paper may not represent all the varieties of the coins from this discovery; it does, however, show a representative sample.  I am grateful to Shri Prithviraj Narayan Mate for inviting me to examine the coins in his possession immediately after the discovery and permitting me to document and photograph them.

*Figs. 4 & 5: Type XV and XX coins from a Private Collection * *(photographed in 1993)* *  *

*Fig. 6: Photographs of coins from the present hoard (in trade, * *2010) * The archaic punch-marked coins, especially the issues of some states / settlements located south of the river Narmad ā (except Wai-Sultanpur type coins) have a similar weight standard and fabric which may indicate the possibility of trade between them. Most of them have an elephant, executed in a rustic and tribal form. These can be further classified into two broad classes: those with a pair of symbols and those having all four as different marks. Those with a pair can be further classified into several groups such as coins with a tree as a fourth mark, those having an Ω (omega)-like curved line as the fourth mark and so on. Most of these coins have been ** ** attributed to ' *Kalinga* ', ' Ā *ndhra* ' and ' *A* ś *maka* ' in an absolutely arbitrary manner by previous researchers. They are represented by important hoards such as Si ṁ gh ā varam (A.P.), Nanded (Maharashtra) and Sonepur (Odisha). Many are found as stray finds all over the Narmad ā valley and the Deccan. When their find spots are plotted, a most interesting fact emerges - the types of these archaic PMCs are specific to valleys of certain rivers. The coins with the tree as the fourth mark are found along the upper God ā vari valley. Those with the 'omega' mark are chiefly centered along the banks of the T ā pi and those with four different symbols (Sonepur hoard type) are chiefly found in the basin of the Mah ā nadi (Chhattisgarh region). 6 ** **

** ** *Fig. 7: Type distribution of all 112 coins (coin type and * *percentage of coins in the hoard) * ** ** From the shapes of all the 112 coins that I examined, it seems that the coin blanks were prepared by beating silver globules and then the weight was adjusted by clipping the corners/sides. Generally the coins with a tree as the fourth mark are known from the north
(upper) God ā vari  region (eg. Nanded, Nasik). But this time, these coins are known from the region which is far south of the God ā vari. All the coins from the Junnar find depict an 'ABCC' pattern i.e. three symbols 'A', 'B' and 'C', of which 'C' is struck twice, thus making four punches in all. The weight of the coins ranged between 1.25-1.55 g. Most of them have an elephant, executed in a rustic and tribal form (symbol 'A'). These coins have a pair of symbols (symbol 'C') and a typical tree (symbol 'B') with or without dots at its bottom. The symbols are struck only on the obverse, the reverse of all the coins being blank. No reverse marks, bankers marks were observed on any of the coins that I had examined.  Here I have classified all the 112 coins from this find into 20 major groups (Type I to XX), based on the symbols. The detailed catalogue and summary of the discovery are given below (as most of the coins are of same type and some coins are uncleaned and, thus, not easy to photograph, only a representative selection are illustrated). ** ** **Table 1:  - Comparison of archaic punch-marked coins from** **Nanded, Nasik and Junnar Finds** Sr No Parameter Nanded Find 7 Nasik Find? 8 Junnar Find Metal Silver Silver Silver No. of Symbols Four Four Four Symbol Pattern ABCC ABCC ABCC Weight 1.48-1.74 g 1.20-1.70 g 1.25-1.55 g

First Symbol (Symbol 'A') Elephant (with variations) Elephant (with variations) Elephant (with variations)

First Symbol (Symbol 'A') Tree with various variations) Tree with various variations) Tree with various variations) A7 Qty of Coins Unknown (1 Kg?) Unknown 326+

** ** **Table 2: Classification of 112 archaic punch-marked coins** **from the present discovery** ** **SN Type A B C**Type-I ** **Type-II** **Type-III** **Type-IV** **Type-V** **Type-VI** **Type-VII** **Type-** **VIII** **Type-IX** **Type-X** **Type-XI** **Type-XII** **Type-** **XIII** **Type-** **XIV** **Type-XV** **Type-** **XVI** **Type-** **XVII** **Type-** **XVIII,** **Var 'A'** ** ** **Type-** **XVIII,** **Var 'B'** **Type-** **XIX** **Type-** **XX, Var** **'A'** ** ** **Type-** **XX, Var** **'B'**

**Undeciph.** **coins** **NA** **NA** **NA** **NA**
**CATALOGUE OF COINS FROM THE PRESENT** **DISCOVERY** - **Type I:**  This type has A.1, B.1, C.1, C.1 symbols. Minor  variations exist. ** **

# **A.1** **B.1** **C.1** **C.1**

## Coin No I.1: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 13x12 mm. ** **

## Coin No I.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 13x14 mm. ** **

Coin No I.3: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm. ** **Coin No I.4: Weight: 1.25 g, Size: 13x12 mm. Coin No I.5: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x16 mm. Coin No I.6: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 14x15 mm.** **

*Histogram of Type I coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: weight * *in grams) * ** ** **B)** ** ** **Type II:** This type has A.2, B.2, C.2, C.2 symbols and is similar to Rajgor type 470 (A ś maka Janpada). 9

# **A.2** **B.2** **C.2** **C.2**

Coin No II.1: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x14 mm. Coin No II.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 16x16 mm. ** **

*Histogram of Type II coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: weight * *in grams) * ** ** **C)** ** ** **Type III:**  This type has A.3, B.3, C.3, C.3 symbols.

# A.3 **B.3** **C.3** **C.3** ** **

** **Coin No III.1: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x15 mm.** ** **D)** ** ** **Type IV:**  This type has A.4, B.4, C.4, C.4 symbols. ** **

# A.4 **B.4** **C.4** **C.4**

Coin No IV.1: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x13 mm. ** ** **E)** ** ** **Type V:**  This type has A.5, B.5, C.5, C.5 ** ** symbols. Minor variations exist.

# A.5 **B.5** **C.5** **C.5**
Coin No V.1; Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 17x14 mm. Coin No V.2: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x14 mm. **  ** ** **

*Histogram of Type V coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: weight * *in grams) * ** ** **F) Type VI:**  This type has A.6, B.6, C.6, C.6 symbols. This type is very similar to type 490 of 'A ś maka Janapada' published by Dr ** **Rajgor 10 and** ** Maheshwari (1982) type 3. 11

# **A.6** **B.6** **C.6** **C.6** **  **

Coin No VI.1: Weight: 1.25 g, Size: 18x13 mm. **G) Type VII:**  This type has A.7, B.7, C.7, C.7 symbols. Minor variations exist.

# **A.7** **B.7** **C.7** **C.7**

Coin No VII.1: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 13x13 mm.

Coin No VII.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x14 ** ** mm.

## Coin No VII.3: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x14 mm. ** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type VII coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **H) Type VIII:**  This type has A.8, B.8, C.8, C.8 symbols. Minor variations exist.  This type is identical to coins of 'A ś maka Janapada' published by Rajgor (type 471) 12 and Mitchiner (1978, No 4152). 13 ** **

# A.8 **B.8** **C.8** **C.8**

Coin No VIII.1: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x14 mm. ** ** **I) Type IX:**  This type has A.9, B.9, C.9, C.9 symbols. Minor variations exist. ** **

# A.9 **B.9** **C.9** **C.9**

Coin No IX.1) Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 16x12 mm. **J) Type X:**  This type has A.10, B.10, C.10, C.10 symbols. Minor variations exist.

# A.10 **B.10** **C.10** **C.10** --- Coin No X.1: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x14 mm. Coin No X.2: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 15x14 mm. Coin No X.3: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 13x13 mm. Coin No X.4: Weight: 1.50 g, Size:- 12x12 mm.

## Coin No X.5: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 13x12 mm. ** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type X coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: weight * *in grams) * ** ** **K) Type XI:** This type has A.11, B.11, C.11, C.11 symbols. Minor variations exist.

# A.11 **B.11** **C.11** **C.11** Coin No XI.1: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 16x12 mm.

## Coin No XI.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size:-15x12 mm.

## Coin No XI.3: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm.

## Coin No XI.4: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 13x12 mm.

Coin No XI.5: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x14 mm. Coin No XI.6: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 18x14 mm. ** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type XI coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **L) Type XII:**  This type has A.12, B.12, C.12, C.12 symbols with minor variations. ** **

# A.12 **B.12** **C.12** **C.12** ** **

Coin No XII.1: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 15x13 mm.
## Coin No XII.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x13 mm. ** **

** ** ** **Coin No XII.3: Weight:   1.50 g, Size: 13x13 mm. Coin No XII.4: Weight:   1.55 g, Size: 15x14 mm. Coin No XII.5: Weight:   1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XII.6: Weight:   1.55 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XII.7: Weight:   1.40 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XII.8: Weight:   1.45 g, Size: 13x13 mm. Coin No XII.9: Weight:   1.40 g, Size: 15x13 mm. Coin No XII.10: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x15 mm.** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of  Type XII coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **M) Type XIII:**  This type has A.13, B.13, C.13, C.13 symbols with minor variations.

# **A.13** **B.13** **C.13** **C.13** ** **

Coin No XIII.1: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 17x12 mm.

Coin No XIII.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 17x12 mm.

## 

Coin No XIII.3: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x13 mm.

Coin No XIII.4: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XIII.5: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 14x13 mm. Coin No XIII.6: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x15 mm.

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type XIII coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * **N) Type XIV:**  This type has A.14, B.14, C.14, C.14 symbols with minor variations.

# A.14 **B.14** **C.14** **C.14** ** **

** **Coin No XIV.1: Weight: 1.30 g, Size: 15x13 mm.** ** **O) Type XV:**  This type has A.15, B.15, C.15, C.15 symbols with minor variations. This type is similar to type 485 of 'A ś maka Janapada' from Prakasha listed by Dr Rajgor. 14

# A.15 **B.15** **C.15** **C.15** ** **

## Coin No XV.1: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 14x13 mm. Coin No XV.2: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm.
Coin No XV.3: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 14x13 mm. Coin No XV.4: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XV.5: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 15x12 mm. ** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type XV coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **P) Type XVI:**  This type has A.16, B.16, C.16, ** ** C.16 symbols with minor variations.

# A.16 **B.16** **C.16** **C.16** ** **

** **Coin No XVI.1: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XVI.2: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XVI.3: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 12x10 mm.** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type XVI coins (x axis: number of coin, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** **

**Q) Type XVII:**  This type has A.17, B.17, C.17, ** ** C.17 symbols with minor variations.

# **A.17** **B.17** **C.17** **C.17** ** **

** ** Coin No XVII.1) Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 12x12 mm. Coin No XVII.2) Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 14x13 mm.

## 

Coin No XVII.3) Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 13x13 mm.

## 

Coin No XVII.4) Weight: 1.25 g, Size: 14x12 mm.

## 

Coin No XVII.5: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 13x12 mm.

## 

Coin No XVII.6: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x12 mm.

## 

Coin No XVII.7: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 18x10 mm.

** **Coin No XVII.8:   Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 12x10 mm. Coin No XVII.9:   Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x11 mm. Coin No XVII.10: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XVII.11: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XVII.12: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x13 mm. Coin No XVII.13: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XVII.14: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 15x13 mm. Coin No XVII.15: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x13 mm. Coin No XVII.16: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XVII.17: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 12x11 mm. Coin No XVII.18: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XVII.19: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XVII.20: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 13x12 mm. Coin No XVII.21: Weight: 1.30 g, Size: 15x12 mm. (with fresh scratch marks) Coin No XVII.22: Weight: 1.30 g, Size: 12x12 mm.** **
** ** ** ** *Histogram  of Type XVII coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **R) Type XVIII:**  This type has two subtypes: **XVIIIa** and ** ** **XVIIIb.** ** ** **XVIIIa:** This sub-type has A.18a, B.18a, C.18a, C.18a symbols with minor.  Here a typical tree symbol appears on the back of the elephant. This type is identical to coins of 'A ś maka Janapada' published by Rajgor (type ** ** 479) 15 and type 1 published by Maheshwari (1978) 16

** ** **A.18a** **B.18a** **C.18a** **C.18a** ** **

** **Coin No XVIII.1: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 17x11 mm.** ** **XVIIIb:** This sub-type has A.18b, B.18b, C.18b, C.18b symbols with minor variations.  Here a crescent appears on his back of the elephant. This type is very similar to type 2 published by Maheshwari (1978) except that the dots at the bottom of tree are not visible 17

**A.18b** **B.18b** **C.18b** **C.18b** ** **

Coin No XVIII.2: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XVIII.3: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x14 mm. ** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type XVIII coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **S) Type XIX:**  This type has A.19, B.19, C.19, C.19 symbols with minor variations.

# A.19 **B.19** **C.19** **C.19**

Coin No XIX.1) Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x13 mm. ** ** **T) Type -XX:**  This type has two subtypes: **XXa and XXb.** ** ** **XXa:** This sub-type has A.20a, B.20a,  C.20a, C.20a symbols with minor variations.

**A.20a** **B.20a** **C.20a** **C.20a** ** ** **Variation XXb:** This type has A.20b, B.20b, C.20b, C.20b symbols with minor variations. **   **

**A.20b** **B.20b** **C.20b** **C.20b** ** **

## Coin No XX.1: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 15x11 mm.

## Coin No XX.2: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm.
** ** Coin No XX.3: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 12x11 mm. Coin No XX.4: Weight: 1.30 g, Size: 14x11 mm.

** ** Coin No XX.5: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x10 mm. Coin No XX.6: Weight: 1.25 g, Size: 12x10 mm.

** ** Coin No XX.7: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 12x12 mm. Coin No XX.8: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm.

** ** Coin No XX.9:   Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 13x13 mm. Coin No XX.10: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 12x12 mm. Coin No XX.11: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x14 mm. Coin No XX.12: Weight: 1.40 g, Size: 14x10 mm. Coin No XX.13: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 13x13 mm. Coin No XX.14: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XX.15: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XX.16: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x10 mm. Coin No XX.17: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 14x13 mm..

** ** Coin No XX.18: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 15x12 mm. Coin No XX.19: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm.

** ** Coin No XX.20: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 14x12 mm. Coin No XX.21: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 15x11 mm. Coin No XX.22: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 16x12 mm. Coin No XX.23: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 15x11 mm. Coin No XX.24: Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 14x12 mm.

Coin No XX.25: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 13x12 mm.

** **Coin No XX.26: Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 13x11 mm. Coin No XX.27) Weight: 1.50 g, Size: 12x12 mm. Coin No XX.28) Weight: 1.35 g, Size: 17x11 mm.**U) Uncertain coins:** These are the coins which are corroded and uncleaned, making it difficult to identify the type.

Coin No UN.1: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 13x13 mm. Coin No UN.1: Weight: 1.45 g, Size: 13x12 mm. Coin No UN.1: Weight: 1.55 g, Size: 13x12 mm. ** **

** ** ** ** *Histogram of Type XX coins (x axis: number of coins, y axis: * *weight in grams) * ** ** **Table 2:  - Distribution of archaic punch-marked coins from** **the present discovery** ** ** Sr No Type Quantity Percentage

Type-I 5.36 % Type-II 1.79 % Type-III 0.89 % Type-IV 0.89 % Type-V 1.79 % Type-VI 0.89 % Type-VII 2.68 % Type-VIII 0.89 % Type-IX 0.89 % Type-X 4.46 % Type-XI 5.36 % Type-XII 8.93 % Type-XIII 5.36 % Type-XIV 0.89 % Type-XV 5.36 % Type-XVI 2.68 % Type-XVII 19.64 % Type-XVIII 2.68 % Type-XIX 0.89 % Type-XX, Var 'A' 25.00 % Type-XX, Var 'B' Undecipherable coins 2.68 % Total 100.00 % ** **
In the second part of this article, I shall be discussing this find in detail and adding some information on the metrology, the order and variation of applying the punches, the denomination, symbols, attribution of the coins based on various methodologies and the importance of the coins from a historical aspect. ** ** *Acknowledgements:*

I am very grateful to Dr Shailendra Bhandare, Dr Shobhana Gokhale, Dr Dilip Rajgor (on SACG), Shri Prithviraj Mate and Rajesh Somkuwar for their constant inspiring support. The author can be contacted at: for more suggestions, discussion and improvement of this topic. *Bibliography and Notes: *

1. Dr Shobhana Gokhale (2008): *'Junnar in Trade during * *S* ā *tav* ā *hana Period'*, Lord of Dak ś inapatha, Reesha Books International, Mumbai, pp 103-107. Reprint from Dr Gokhale Shobhana (1991): ' *Junnar in Trade during S* ā *tav* ā *hana * *Period'*, Paper presented in 3rd International Colloquium on 'Coinage, Trade and Economy' at IIRNS, Nasik. Edited by Amal Kumar Jha, pp 56. 2. Dr V.V. Mirashi (1939-40):  ' *An Incomplete grant of Sinda * *Adityavarman: * Ś *aka 887'*, Epigraphia Indica, Vol XXV (193940), pp 164-171. 3. Dr Himanshu Prabha Ray (1986): ' *Monastery and Guilds'*,  Oxford University Press, pp 72-73. 4. I am indebted to Dr Shobhana Gokhale for providing me with  these photographs. 5. The coins were published by K.K. Maheshwari and Dilip  Rajgor. For detailed reference please refer to items 9 and 11 in this list. 6. Dr Shailendra Bhandare (1999): ' *The Archaic Indian Punch-* *marked coins - Approaches to Classification'*, Paper presented at a meeting of the Oriental Numismatic Society. I am indebted to him for sharing the information during personal communication. 7. Samudragupta Patil (1991): *'Punch-marked coins of A* ś *maka * *Janpada'*, Numismatic Digest, Vol XV, IIRNS, Nasik, pp 5-9; S.J. Mangalam (1992): 'Punch-marked coins of A ś maka Janpada', *Indian* *Coin Society Newsletter*, No 17, November 1992, Nagpur, pp. 1-2; S.J. Mangalam and Samudragupta Patil (1993): *'Local Punch-marked coins from Maharashtra'*, JNSI Vol LV, Varanasi, pp 13. 8. K.K. Maheshwari (1978): ' *Two types of local Punch-marked * *coins'*, Numismatic Digest, Vol II Part I, pp 1-3, type 2; Op cit11; Dr Dilip Rajgor (2001): ' *Punch-marked Coins of Early * *Historic India'*, Reesha Books International, Mumbai, pp 8487. Here, Rajgor took the weight of the type 497 coin as 0.6 g, whereas Maheshwari (Op cit 16, type 1) took it as 1.4632 g, Prashant P. Kulkarni asked both researchers to provide the correct weight of this coin in his article cf. Prashant P. Kulkarni (2006): 'Coins of the A ś maka, Vidarbha, Ć edi, Kalinga and * * Ā ndhra Janapada', *Sangam: Numismatics and * *cultural history, Essays* *in honour of Dr R. Krishnamurthy*, edited by R. Nagaswamy, New Era Publications, Chennai, pp 65-85. 9. Dr Dilip Rajgor (2001): ' *Punch-marked Coins of Early * *Historic India'*, Reesha Books International, Mumbai, pp 8487, type 470. 10. Op cit 9, Type 490.  11. K.K. Maheshwari (1982): 'Local Punch-marked coins from  Western * * Maharashtra', *Numismatic Digest*, Vol VI Part I & II, pp 1, type 3. 12. Op cit 9, type 471.  13. Mitchiner (1978): * 'Oriental Coins, the Ancient and Classical * *World',* Hawkins Publications, London, cf. type 4152. 14. Op cit 9, type 485.  15. Op cit 9, type 479.  16. K.K. Maheshwari (1978): 'Two types of local Punch-marked  coins', *Numismatic Digest*, Vol II Part I, pp 1-3, type 1. 17. Op cit 16, type 1.

# ANDHARA AND INDO-GREEK FANTASY **COINS** ** ** By Hans Loeschner

In JONS 204 I published an AE coin showing on one side a 6armed "Gandharan symbol" and on the other side an elephant walking to right, with a "Mauryan symbol" above (Fig. 1).

*** *** *Fig. 1: AE coin published in JONS 204 *

The combination of an elephant and the Mauryan symbol is well known from ca. 200 BC Taxila AE coins (Fig. 2).

*Fig. 2: AE coin allocated to Taxila ca. 200 * *BC* *  * *(<https://www.Zeno.ru> 29384)  *

Stimulated by this article, Professor Harry Falk, Berlin, informed me about "Indo-Greek" fantasy coins, with a similar elephant, as found in the bazaars of Peshawar. With his consent these pieces are shown in Figs 3 and 4.

*Fig. 3: Ar "Antialkidas" fantasy coin * *(Source: Harry Falk, Berlin)  *

*Fig. 4: Au "Hippostratos" fantasy coin * *(Source: Harry Falk, Berlin)  * Harry Falk points out that an African - and not an Indian (Figure 2. - elephant is shown on these "Indo-Greek" fantasy coins and  also on the "Gandhara" type of Fig. 1. The "Gandhara" AE piece, obtained from a well-respected coin vendor at low price, definitely is no "business case". Are such fantasy coins study trials for producing "precious" fakes?

*Acknowledgements and Comments * The author would like to thank Professor Harry Falk, Berlin, and Professor Pankaj Tandon, Boston, for valuable discussions. As noted in the JONS 204 article, JONS co-editor Robert Bracey, British Museum, had already raised doubts about the genuineness of the "Gandhara" piece.
# THE INDO-PARTHIAN COINS IN THE **BRITISH MUSEUM** By Wannaporn Rienjang

In numismatic nomenclature, the term 'Indo-Parthian' refers to coins issued by the dynasty whose first ruler was Gondophares ( AD c.32-60). These coins were issued in an area spanning from the southeast of present day Iran to the northwest of the Indian subcontinent. Along with Greek elements, the Indo-Parthian coins exhibit features found on the coins of the Iranian Parthian dynasty (c. 247 BC to AD 224). The majority of the Indo-Parthian coins have their legends in a local Indic language or Prakrit on the reverse, and in Greek on the obverse. The Prakrit language used on their coins was written in Kharoshthi script, a script derived from Aramaic. Some later IndoParthian coins have legends in Pahlavi (a Middle Iranian language and script). Coins of the Indo-Parthians have been found from Seistan (southeast Iran), Arachosia (around the region of modern day Qandahar), Begram, Kabul, and Jalalabad (southeast Afghanistan), Gandhara and Taxila (northwest Pakistan), Sind, and Punjab/Pathankot, but according to Charles Masson not north of the Hindu Kush. The British Museum has 686 Indo-Parthian coins. Of these, 588 coins belong to the main collection, acquired from 1838 onwards with the last acquisition in 1996. The rest, 98 coins, belong to the Masson collection (IOLC: British Library India Office Loan Collection). The IOLC coins were collected principally from the urban site of Begram, and to a small extent in the bazaars of Kabul and Jalalabad in the 1830s by Charles Masson, a deserter from the army of the British East India Company, who worked latterly as a 'news-writer' for the Company in Kabul. During his time in Afghanistan, Masson also explored more than 50 Buddhist stupas in the region of Kabul and Jalalabad. The main collections contain coins of eleven Indo-Parthian kings, distinguished by the names inscribed on the coins. These rulers in an approximate chronological order are Gondophares, Abdagases, Sasan, Sarpedones, Orthagnes, Ubouzanes, Pakores, Abdagases II, Sanabares, Farn-Sasan, and Pahares. The IOLC collection (probably from Jalalabad) contains coins of three IndoParthian kings: Gondophares, Abdagases and Sasan. The Indo-Parthian coins can be divided into 3 main groups. The first group comprises coins of Gondophares and of rulers who make reference to Gondophares in their coin legends, using 'Gondophares' in addition to their given names. These rulers are Abdagases, Sasan, Sarpedones, Orthagnes, and Ubouzanes. The second group are coins of rulers in whose coin legends the word 'Gondophares' does not appear, but their names and coin designs indicate their Indo-Parthian affiliations. These rulers are Pakores and Abdagases II. The last group are coins that contain Pahlavi letters, either as monograms or legends. As with the second group, the rulers who issued these coins make no reference to Gondophares on their coin legends but their coin designs indicate their Indo-Parthian affiliations. 'Gondophares' or *Vindapharna * in Old Persian means 'Winner of Glory' and thus may have been a title rather than a name (Errington & Curtis 2007; Senior 2000). The word 'Gondophares' is used by his successors, Sarpedones, Orthagnes, Ubouzanes and Sasan, in addition to their given names. Coins of Gondophares provide a prototype for those of other Indo-Parthian kings. Gondophares was mentioned as 'kings of the Indians' in the second to third century Apocryphal Christian *Acts of St. Thomas * (I.1-2), and as 'the great king Gondophares' ( *Maharaja * *Guduvhraya* ) in the Takht-i-Bahi inscription (Konow 1929). On this inscription, a regnal year of Gondophares is given as year 26 in the year 103 of Azes. If the workable hypothesis is accepted that the Azes era is synonymous with the Vikrama era of 57 BC then year 103 of Azes provides a date for the beginning of the reign of Gondophares of c. AD 20 but the latest discovery of a Yona era (lasting 384 years according to inscriptional evidence), in
which year 1 of Azes equals Yona year 129, suggests that the Azes/Vikrama equation should be reconsidered. Calculations by Joe Cribb (2005:221-2) indicate that the Yona era could be identified with the year founded by Eucratides I in Bactria c.174

BC, resulting in Azes year 1/Yona year 129 equalling c.46 BC. This calculation provides a revised date for Gondophares of c. AD 32 for year 1 of his reign (Errington & Curtis 2007, 53-55, table 1). There are 213 coins of Gondophares in the museum: 143 in the main collection and 70 in the British Library loan collection (IOLC). Gondophares' coins are arranged according to Senior's classification in the museum collection as issues of Seistan, Arachosia, Gandhara, and Pathankot. The IOLC coins comprise issues only of Arachosia and Gandhara. There are 138 Gondophares' coins (copper tetradrachms) of the issue Senior labels Arachosian in the museum: 54 in the main collection and 65 of the IOLC coins. The majority of Gondophares' Arachosian issues in the Museum have a king's bust on the obverse and a standing deity on the reverse (fig.1).

*Fig. 1: Arachosian issue of Gondophres.  * *Obv.: bust of king. Rev.: Nike *

Some of the Arachosian issues of Gondaphares contain the socalled Gondopharid symbol (fig.2): a symbol which continued to appear on the coins of his successors (fig.3). This symbol resembles the symbol on some coins of the Parthian kings, e.g. Gotarzes (c.45-50 BC ), Volagases III and IV (fig.4). The Gondophares symbol was also used by the Sasanian king, Shapur I ( AD 240-72/3). Legends on these Arachosian issues (king's bust/standing deity) of Gondophares are written in Greek on the obverse and Kharoshthi on the reverse. Arachosian issues of Abdagases, Sasan, Sarpedones, and Orthagnes also follow the designs of Gondophares. They all have a king's bust on the obverse, and a standing deity on the reverse in more or less the same style as those of Gondophares, with some differences in design such as the bunched hair on the coins of Sarpedones and Orthagnes (fig.5).

*Fig. 2: Arachosian issue of Gondophare.  * *Obv.: king on horseback with Nike in front.  * *Rev.: Gondopharid symbol *

*Fig. 3: Gandharan issue of Abdagases.  * *Obv.: king on horseback with Gondopharid symbol in front.  * *Rev.: Zeus *
*Fig. 4: Gotarzes I.  * *Obv.: bust of king.  * *Rev.: symbol similar to Gondopharid symbol *

*Fig. 5: Arachosian issue of Orthagnes. * * Obv.: bust of king. Rev.: Nike *

The Arachosian issues are the most prevalent amongst the Gondophares coins in the IOLC collection (65 out of 70). With Begram and Jalalabad being the probable provenance of the IOLC coins, this implies that the Arachosian-type coins of Gondophares are more common in circulation in southeast Afghanistan than others such as Gandharan or Pathankot types. The coins of the later Indo-Parthian rulers are those of Sanabares, Farn-Sasan and Pahares. They make no reference to Gondophares on their coin legends, but their coin designs indicate their Indo-Parthian affiliations. Their coins explicitly exhibit Iranian elements, in that they have Pahlavi letters, either as monograms or legends. Farn-Sasan has particularly strong Iranian connections by having his coin legends written in Pahlavi on both sides, and a fire altar, instead of a deity, on the reverse (fig.6). A coin of one of these later Indo-Parthian rulers, Pahares, was found over-struck on a coin of Vasudeva I, a Kushan king of c. AD 190227, providing a date of the third century AD for the end of the dynasty.

*Fig. 6: Farn-Sasan * *Obv.: bust of king. Rev.: fire altar *

***The British Museum online database*** The 686 Indo-Parthian coins are now available online on the British Museum website, where images of the coins are included along with the data associated with them. The records were created by Prof. Dr Nasim Khan, Director of the Institute of Anthropology and Archaeology, Peshawar University, with the assistance of the present author as part of the British Museum's World Collections Programme. To access the Indo-Parthian coins online: 1.  Go to the British Museum website: <http://www.britishmuseum.org/> 2.  Click on the 'research' tab at the top 3.  Click on 'search the collection database' 4.  Click on 'advance search' 5.  Select the category 'Cultures/Dynasties/Periods' and type 'Indo-Parthian' 6.  You will then be offered a screen with the description of the Indo-Parthian term and the number of related objects in the collections, select that option and 'add the term to your object search'

7.  Click on 'search for object' and you will now get the objects displayed with small thumbnails 8.  Click on the thumbnails and then the full details of the coin will be displayed *References *

Cribb, J., 2005. The Greek Kingdom of Bactria (northern Afghanistan), its coinage and its collapse. In: O. Bopearachchi and M.F. Boussac (eds) *Afghanistan, Carrefour entre l'est et l'ouest. * Turnhout, 207-26. Errington, E., and Curtis, V., 2007. *From Persepolis to the Punjab: * *Exploring ancient Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan. * London: the British Museum Press. Konow, S. (ed.), 1929. *Kharoshthi inscriptions with the exception of those * *of Asoka. * Calcutta. * * Senior, R., 2000. *A Catalogue of Indo-Scythian coins. 4 Vols. * Glastonbury. ** ** ** ** **SOME RECENTLY DISCOVERED COINS** **OF THE SULTANS OF MADURA,** **GUJARAT (AND KHANDESH)** By Shailendra Bhandare, University of Oxford In the years following the publication of 'The Coins of the Indian Sultanates' by Stan Goron and JP Goenka (Delhi, 2001 - 'G&G' hereinafter), a number of new types of sultanate coins have been reported. I have been documenting new coins of some of the sultanate series and now the number is sufficient to warrant their publication. I will also take this opportunity to offer a note on a gold tanka of A ḥ san Sh ā h, the Sul ṭā n of Madura, which I published earlier. ***A gold heavy tankah of Shams al-D*** ī ***n '*** Ā ***dil Sh*** ā ***h, Sul*** ṭā ***n of*** ***Madura*** The Sultanate of Madura, located in the far south of the Indian subcontinent, was perhaps the smallest and shortest-lived amongst the independent sultanates that arose out of the fragmentation of the Delh ī Sultanate in the 14 th century AD. The province of Madura was first brought under Afghan domination by Malik K ā f ū r, the slave of 'Al ā al-D ī n Khalj ī. In 1334, the governor of the province, Sayyid A ḥ san, rebelled and declared his independence. His master, Mu ḥ ammad Tughlaq, the Sul ṭā n of Delh ī, tried to march south to quell the rebellion, but had to turn back as epidemic ravaged his army. There were, in all, nine sultans at Madura who struck coins between 1334 and 1378. The emergent Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagar absorbed the sultanate in the late 14 th century AD. The coins of the Sul ṭā ns of Madura, particularly the gold issues, are noteworthy for their employment of titles and legends each having a uniqueness of its own. Thus, A ḥ san Sh ā h (13341339) calls himself *ab* ū * al-* ḍ *u* ‛ *af* ā *h wa al-mis* ā *k* ī *n*, or 'Father of the weak and the destitute' on his gold tankas while N āṣ ir al-D ī n D ā mgh ā n Sh ā h (1344-1347) names himself as *w* ā *rith-i-mulk-i-* *sulaim* ā *n* ('Inheritor of the kingdom of Solomon'). These titles are not known on any other sultanate coins of India. All gold coins of the Madura Sultans are extremely rare, each type known from less than five specimens. Goron & Goenka list two gold coins for the seventh Sul ṭā n of Madura, Shams al-D ī n ' Ā dil Sh ā h, who ruled AD 1347-1358. They are virtually of the same type - the sultan's *laqab* and titles ( *shams * *al-duny* ā * wa al-d* ī *n, al-* ḥ *al* ī *m, al-kar* ī *m*, 'The sun of the religion and the world, the gentle, the generous') appear in a lotus-shaped cartouche on the obverse, while his *qunyat* and name ( *abu al-* *mu* ẓ *affar '* ā *dil sh* ā *h* ) appear in a circle on the reverse, and the mint and date in the exergue. Judging by the date of issue, there seems to be a decade in between the two coins, and thus G&G suggest ** ** that the second coin 'may have been issued to mark ten years of his reign'. A completely new type of gold tanka was recently acquired by a private collector in Mumbai and deserves publication. This coin is --- --- ---
However, there is also reference of an overland route from Mymensingh to Sylhet. The reference is in *Baharistan-i-Ghaybi*, an account of Mughal wars with Assam, Cooch Behar etc. Here it is mentioned that 'Uthm ā n or 'Usm ā n who was one of the *Baro * *Bhuiyans * or Twelve Landed Chiefs of Bengal 73, at the time of the Mughals, had his fort at Bukainagar in Mymensingh. When the imperial Mughal army approached Mymensingh, two of 'Usm ā n's associates deserted him. Seeing that his position had weakened, as a war measure, he is said to have gathered 'two hundred and fifty Afghans and took them with him to Sylhet via the Laur hills' 74. Laur or Laud is referred to in an inscription at Sonargaon, Narayanganj dated AH 889, during the time of the later sultan, Jal ā l al-D ī n Fat ḥ Sh ā h, which records the building of a mosque. The builder/donor was Muqarrab al-Daulat Malik, who is called Sar-iLashkar and Wazir of Iql ī m Mua ẓẓ am ā b ā d and Sar-i-Lashkar of Thana Laud 75. Laur/Laud was thus a place near Mua ẓẓ am ā b ā d in East Bengal on the route to Sylhet from Mymensingh. The coin under discussion thus states that it was minted at Qa ṣ ba Ghiy ā thp ū r, which is on the way from the capital to Srihat, at a strategically important place which could be regarded as the gateway. It apparently introduces to the general population at Lakhnauti and elsewhere, the new town in the name of the sultan, and tries to give a geographical reference so they could understand its strategic and economic importance. Sirhat or Sylhet, which had only been conquered nineteen years previously, was economically a very important town. It is clear that Bengal imported silver via both overland and sea routes from the east, probably from mines in Yunnan and Burma 76. The silver reached Bengal via Kamrup in the north, Tripura and Sylhet in the east and Chittagong and Arakan in the south-east 77. Sylhet was also of importance from the religious point of view, as it was where the famous Sufi saint, Hazrat Sh ā h Jal ā l, was residing at that time 16. So the present coin can be regarded as one of the first productions from Ghiy ā thp ū r, where an attempt was made to inform the populace about the location and importance of the newly established town in the sultan's name. The next type of coin we would like to draw to the attention of readers comes in the names of three sultans, and all three are illustrated below:

These coins do not bear any specific date or mint name, but do contain a phrase that can perhaps be read as *sirhat mardan*, which can be translated as the subduing of Sirhat, or Sylhet. The coins in the name of N āṣ ir al-D ī n Nu ṣ rat Sh ā h (no.3) are the most 73 Md Mohar Ali, *History of the Muslims of Bengal*, Imam Muhammad Ibn Sa'ud Islamic University,p.288. 74 *Baharistan-i-Ghaybi*, an account of Mughal wars with Assam, Cooch Behar etc, p 110 75 Abdul Karim, *Corpus of Arabic and Persian Inscriptions of Bengal*, Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, 1992 p.204. 76 Ibid. p.299. 77 John Deyell, 'The China connection: problems of silver supply in medieval Bengal', *Precious Metals in the Later Medieval and Early * *Modern Worlds*, p.207-224.
common, those of 'Al ā al-D ī n F ī r ū z Shah II (no.4) are scarce, while those Ghiy ā th al-D ī n Ma ḥ m ū d (no.5) are very rare, but all of them are of similar style, and were probably struck in the same place, and over a short period. It can be noted that the word *mardan * is consistently located at the top on the coins of both Nu ṣ rat Sh ā h and F ī r ū z Sh ā h and underneath on those of Ma ḥ m ū d Sh ā h, as shown below, but the only diacritical marks to help the correct reading are the 2 dots over the 't' on the coins of Ma ḥ m ū d. 'Sirhat' as on Nu ṣ rat Sh ā h 'Sirhat as on Ma ḥ m ū d Sh ā h

There is, unfortunately, no way of determining exactly where these pieces were struck, but it is most likely that they were struck at the capital, Gaur, for local propaganda purposes, rather than in Sylhet itself. Comparison can be made to the coins of the Habshi sultan, Shams al-D ī n Mu ẓ affar Shah, who struck coins with the legend 'Kamtah Mardan' to celebrate the invasion of Kamata, or Cooch Behar, in AH 898 ( *c* AD 1492). (all these coins, nos. 5-8, are in the collection of Nicholas Rhodes) It should be mentioned that at least two readings of this legend have previously been proposed. Blochmann suggested *yad i-* *Hurmuzd * (by the hand of, or engraved by, Hurmuzd) 78 which has not recently received support, and seems very unlikely as there are no precedents for such a private name to be included in the legend of a sultanate coin. Later, the reading 'Tirhut Mardan' was proposed, initially we believe by John Deyell and Rezaul Karim of Bangladesh, and has been widely accepted by scholars and collectors, but as far as we are aware this reading was not published until Michael Mitchiner and Goron & Goenka included it in their catalogues of the coinage of the sultanates. Although an invasion of Tirhut did take place during the early part of the reign of Nu ṣ rat Sh ā h, there is no reason why Nu ṣ rat Sh ā h's successors should have celebrated this campaign. This is the first time that the reading 'Sirhat Mardan' has been proposed, and these coins associated with the unsuccessful invasion of the north-east that took place during the years AD 1531-2. The striking of these coins may have taken place about the same time as the coins of F ī r ū z Sh ā h II, with the Srihat, mint, which is another reason for believing that they were not struck in Sylhet itself, but they still shed light on the history of the period. At this period the military efforts of the Bengal sultanate were certainly concentrated towards the north-east, so we feel that the reading of Sirhat Mardan is much more likely, historically, than Tirhut Mardan, although it should be noted that, in the absence of diacritical marks in the key parts of the inscription, either reading is technically possible. ** ** ** **

78 H.Blochmann, *Contributions to the Geography and History of Bengal * *(Muhammedan Period)*, Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 1968, p.93 & Pl.IX No.12, illustrating a coin of Na ṣ rat Sh ā h. This reading was also quoted by Abdul Karim in his *Corpus of the Muslim Coins of Bengal (down to 1538 * *AD)*, Asiatic Society of Pakistan Papers No.6, Dacca 1960, p.120, quoting Blochmann, and agreeing with the latter's comment that he was doubtful of the reading but 'it is difficult to suggest anything else'. --- --- ---
| Maldives in the Indian Ocean are somewhat of a mystery. | Many |
|:--- |:--- |
| of these coins are easily obtainable, but very few detailed studies |  |
| have been made of them. In recent years the only readily available |  |
| catalogues are the slim book by Tim J Browder, Maldive Islands |  |
| Money, published in 1969, and the various volumes of Krause and |  |
| Mishler's |  |
| Standard |  |
| Catalog |  |
| of |  |
| World |  |
| Coins |  |
| (SCWC). |  |
| Unfortunately both of these works contain a number of errors and |  |
| omissions, many only noticed through the benefit of hindsight. |  |
| However, they do form a good basis for further serious studies. |  |
| I was fortunate to have worked in the Maldives in 1975 and |  |
| was able to assemble a reasonably large and comprehensive |  |
| collection of these fascinating coins. At that time I had no access |  |
| to any reference books, but was able to identify different rulers, if |  |
| not their names, and their approximate reign dates. I subsequently |  |
| found that I had acquired specimens of most of the different coins |  |
| struck, apart from the earliest dates. However, I could console |  |
| myself that even major museum collections do not have many of |  |
| these either. |  |
| In general, coins that were struck in the Maldives are broadly |  |
| of the same pattern with only a few exceptions. | Despite the |
| Maldives having its own language and script, Divehi, all coins |  |
| have inscriptions in Arabic. | The obverse usually carries a |
| shortened form of the reigning Sultan's name. | The reverse carries |
| his standard titles along with the Hijri date. The official title of the |  |
| Sultan was "Sultan of the Twelve Thousand Islands", but this was |  |
| not used on the coins. | However, the Ottoman sultans' title of |

The basic denomination in the Maldives was the larin. Originally this was the bent silver wire larin that was first produced in Persia in the early 16 th century AD.  Because of its purity, it quickly gained popularity in trade around the Persian Gulf and then through to southern India and Ceylon.  Wire larins were struck in many different countries, including some in the Maldives.  However, in the late 17 th century circular, silver coins were first struck in the Maldives.  These were also called larins and were of the same weight as the silver wire types at around 4.8g in weight. Over the next century or so the coinage developed into a regular pattern with eventually two denominations predominating, the double larin and the half larin.  The local names for these coins were the bodu (great) and kuda (small) larins.  The originally high purity silver content of these coins was soon increasingly debased until all pretence of silver content was abandoned and coins were generally struck from copper or bronze. While the bodu larins managed to maintain their weight at around 9.0 to 9.6g, the smaller kuda larins were gradually over the years struck with widely varying weights.  Even coins of the same date can be encountered with weights varying from around 0.7g to over 3g. A number of numismatists, including Tim Browder, have tried to suggest that there were two different denominations being struck, the ¼ and ½ Larins. However, there is no evidence to back up this theory other than the occurrence of possibly slightly smaller dies for the lower-weight coins. There are no contemporary records referring to two or more smaller denominations, and my examination of large numbers of coins of a single date show that the weights were fairly evenly distributed over the ranges encountered. The most likely explanation for these widely varying weights is that contained in an article by Raf van Laere 80 where he recounts an interview with a direct descendant of the last mint master of the Maldives.  The minting methods were described both for the issues dated AH 1294 and 1298 and the last series of coins struck between AH 1318 and 1320 ( AD 1901-1903).  The earlier coinages were apparently not well planned in advance.  All coinage metals had to be imported from elsewhere, mainly Ceylon or Calcutta, and there were the inevitable shortages from time to time. The mint master and presumably his predecessors, who were not subject to any government control, were forced either to use metals other than copper or bronze, or strike smaller and lighter coins. There was a change in minting methods for the AH 1318/1319/1320 coins, as well as changes to the denominations involved.  It is these coins that form the subject of my studies in this article. ***History*** The Maldives are situated in the Indian Ocean just to the southwest of the southern tip of India and comprise a string of some 20 coral atolls stretching from about 7º north to just south of the equator.  Each atoll is inhabited but many of the smaller islands within the atolls remain uninhabited.  The capital, Malé, is situated in the largest atoll grouping in the central part of the archipelago. The very early history of the Maldives is rather obscure, but it is likely that the first settlers were Singhalese fishermen from Ceylon and the southern Indian sub-continent, probably before the 1 st century BC. This ethnic grouping is nowadays centred in the southern atolls. Another grouping gradually settled in the northern atolls during the 11 th century from Southern India.  From early in the 12 th century, Arabian settlers concentrated around the Malé atolls. The Maldives had converted to Islam in the 12 th century AD. The Buddhist King Dovemi ( AD 1141-1166) in Malé was converted in AD 1153, but Addu atoll and other islands in the extreme south of the Maldives were converted earlier, in AD 1127.

80 Raf van Laere: 'The Last Native Coinage of the Maldives Islands', *ONS * *Newsletter* No.52, December 1977
However, this conversion is usually disregarded by the Maldivian authorities. Despite many internal, and occasional external, dynastic upheavals and short-lived invasions by the Portuguese, the Maldives lasted as an independent Islamic sultanate from AD 1153 to 1968. Although the Maldives became a British protectorate in 1887 until 1965, there was very little, if any, interference in their internal affairs. From 1968 onwards the sultanate was replaced by the independent Republic of Maldives. A list of Maldivian rulers from the time of the introduction of coins is given in both Browder and the Krause and Mishler volumes. Although these two lists agree with each other there is one period where they are inaccurate to the extent that certain coins are attributed to the wrong sultan. The most authoritative list is given by the archaeologist, HCP Bell, 81 in his extremely wellresearched book. It was originally commissioned by the Ceylon government in 1922 and published in 1940, some three years after his death.  He had visited the Maldives on a number of occasions from 1879 and became an expert on their history, culture and language. For his research he was granted expert assistance from the Maldivian authorities, although that was not always forthcoming. The more accurate sequence of rulers around the period of the coins included in this study is given below.

***Full Name*** ***Name given on*** ***coins*** ***Date of*** ***Reign*** ***AH*** ***Date of*** ***Reign*** ***AD*** Muhammad Mu'in ud-din Iskandar bin alHajji Muhammad Mu'in ud-din Iskandar 12131799-

| Muhammad 'Imad | ud-din IV | Iskandar bin | Mohammad |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Muhammad 'Imad | ud-din Iskandar | 1250- | 1835- |
| Ibrahim Nur ud- | din IV Iskandar | bin Muhammad | 'Imad ud-din IV |
| Ibrahim Nur ud- | din Iskandar | 1299- | 1882- | Muhammad 'Imad ud-din Iskandar 12501835-

Ibrahim Nur uddin IV Iskandar bin Muhammad 'Imad ud-din IV Ibrahim Nur uddin Iskandar 12991882-

Muhammad Mu'in ud-din II *(No coins issued)* 13041886-

Ibrahim Nur uddin IV Iskandar bin Muhammad 'Imad ud-din IV *(No coins issued)* 13061888-

Muhammad 'Imad ud-din V Iskandar *(No coins issued)* 13101892- Muhammad Shams ud-din III Iskandar *(No coins issued)* 13101893-

Muhammad 'Imad ud-din VI (Al-Haji) Muhammad 'Imad ud-din Iskandar 13111893- Muhammad Shams ud-din III Iskandar Muhammad Shams ud-din Iskandar 13201903-

81 H C P Bell, Ceylon Civil Service (retired): *The Maldives Islands. * *Monograph on the History, Archaeology, and Epigraphy*, 1940 edition by Ceylon Government Press, Colombo; reprint published by the Novelty Printers & Publishers Pvt. Ltd., Male, Maldives, 2002.  ISBN

The significant alteration to the attributed Sultans in SCWC and Browder is that the 1318-1320 coins were issued during the reign of Muhammad 'Imad ud-din VI.  He was deposed by Muhammad Shams ud-din III Iskandar whilst returning from his Hajj to Mecca in AH 1320 ( AD 1903). ***Coinage of*** ***AH*** ***1318, 1319 and 1320*** * * Coins struck over the  preceding 125 years in the Maldives were of just two denominations, the bodu larin averaging around 9.0g and the kuda larin at about 1.5 to 2.0g.  However, the next series of coins were of three separate denominations. The first was dated AH 1318, a 1 larin coin struck at a reasonably consistent 0.9g; diameters can either be 10 or 11mm.  A 2 lariat coin of 1.8g, 13mm diameter, followed in AH 1319.  A 4 lariat coin of 3.6g, 17mm diameter, dated AH 1320 was the final locally struck coin to be issued. The latter is the first Maldivian coin to include the denomination as part of its legend. One feature of this series of coins that has received almost no attention is the appearance of extra symbols, such as dots, crosses or stars, in the basic designs of the coins that are otherwise devoid of superfluous decoration.  These symbols are definitely not part of the Arabic words and only occur in these particular coins. The earliest mention of them I have found is in an original, undated letter I now have in my possession, written in around 1967. Although only signed by someone called "John", I have now discovered the writer was John Humphris, a one-time Canadian dealer and numismatist, specialising in Middle Eastern coinages. He later worked for World Coins Magazine in the United States. He commented that there was a wide variety of symbols on the 1318 1 larin and 1319 2 lariat coins. There is only a brief description of some of the different symbols encountered and he does not attempt to categorise them in any way. He speculates that they could be mintmarks, die cutter's marks or mint master's marks.  The only other reference I have found to mention these symbols is in the book written by Wolfgang Bertsch 82.  He illustrates on page 12 many of the individual marks found on the 1318 coins, and then lists various patterns of marks found on the 1319 coins. Van Laere's article mentioned above, however, might offer some clues as to their significance.  The mint master, Sikka Husain Takha, had been involved in the striking of the coins of AH 1294 and 1298, which had been struck in the "traditional way". This meant that the larger bodu larins had flans that were cast in moulds, while the smaller kuda larins were made out of sheet metal. No mention is made in the article about the issue of kuda larins dated AH 1300, and my own opinion is that Husain Takha was probably not involved with the production of these coins. While the 1294 and 1298 issues were well engraved and struck, the 1300 coins have noticeably inferior engraving and the flans can be cruder in appearance. Van Laere's article goes on to describe the more sophisticated procedures that were introduced for the series of coins commencing in AH 1318. All of the coin flans were punched out from a well-prepared sheet of metal 83.  One novelty that was introduced at this stage was that five minters, all members of the same family, sat around a fly-wheel from an old (steam?) engine. Each minter had a die fixed in a conveniently located hole in the fly-wheel. The lower, fixed die was made of steel while the loose upper die was made of phosphor bronze.  All dies were engraved by the mint master, Husain Takha.  Although not mentioned in the article, it seems likely that the punched out blanks were first annealed to soften them and then soaked in an acid solution to give a clean, bright surface.  I have a number of coins in my collection that still show traces of lustre. The whole system employed permitted the production of very well-finished coins which have 82 Wolfgang Bertsch: * A Catalogue of Maldivian Coins in the Collection of * *Wolfgang Bertsch*, Gundernhausen (near Darmstadt), Germany, 1995 83 From my own examination of 1292, 1294 and 1298 kuda larins, it is obvious that many, but not all, of the flans for these coins were also punched out from sheets of metal. ---
these coins is the distinctive "cut-out" shapes on the flan.  These are caused by the punch used to cut the blanks from the prepared sheet of metal being partially over the edge of a previously cut hole, or the edge of the prepared sheet. An example of this problem is shown in *fig. 2*.

*Fig. 2 * Although the coins are usually well struck, apart from the problems mentioned above, occasionally damage is caused to the dies.  The most likely case would be from debris filling some of the design, or possibly striking the dies together without a blank in between.  This results in some blurring or disfigurement of the design, which does not seem to have been caused by doublestriking.  An example is shown below in *fig. 3*.  The coin on the right with the damaged die is in my collection, but another collector has sent me pictures of an almost identical specimen in his collection.  The coin on the left is from the same die, but struck before the damage had been done.

| were struck in yellowish brass. | These brass coins can be found |
|:--- |:--- |
| occurring on the 1318, 1319 or 1320 issues and they are not |  |
| specific to any particular dies. The variation in metal merely |  |
| reflects the fact that the mint master had to use whatever was |  |
| available at the time. | Bell mentions on Page 79 of his book that |
| copper or brass were from pots or other suitable material and that |  |
| the alleged proportion of copper to brass was quoted locally as two |  |
| to one. |  |
| Although in my studies I originally concentrated on |  |
| determining the different marks found on the reverse dies I also |  |
| studied the obverse dies. There are no distinctive features |  |
| appearing on the obverse of any of the 1318, 1319 or 1320 coins. |  |
| The design remains the same for each of the respective dates. |  |
| Examples of the obverse designs for these coins are shown in fig. |  |
| 4. | The only way to distinguish individual dies is to carefully and |
| patiently study the precise shape, alignment | and position of each |
| word. Originally I started this exercise using just a magnifying |  |
| glass, but with the coming of computers and digital images the |  |
| whole process has been made much easier. | It is now possible to |

## *1318 1 larin * *1319 2 lariat* * *

* * *1320 4 lariat * * * *Fig. 4 * So far I have identified 17 different obverse dies on the 1318 1 larins, compared to 16 reverse dies.  On the 1319 2 lariat coins there are 14 obverse and 13 reverse dies. Oddly with the 1320 4 lariat coins there are fewer obverse than reverse dies with 6 obverse and 7 reverse dies. Mostly an obverse is linked with only two or three reverse dies, but one obverse 1319 die must have had a very varied or lengthy career as I have found it linked with at least six different reverses. I have been fortunate in not only having a good selection of many of these different coins but have received high-resolution images of coins in the possession of other collectors, as well as observing coins elsewhere such as eBay, dealers' lists and the Zeno.ru Oriental Coins Database website.  I am fairly confident now that I have discovered most, if not all, of the different types that exist. ***Silver Coins*** Mention is made both in SCWC and Browder of specimens of the 1320 4 lariat coins being struck in silver, and that they were likely to be presentation pieces. For a while in 1976 I was in correspondence with Tim Browder and he mentioned to me that he had purchased several of these coins in the mid-1960s, but found they were all silver-plated. 84 Unfortunately he did not include any pictures or rubbings of the coins. While I have no doubt the coins he handled may well have been faked, there are extremely rare genuine examples existing. Although SCWC and Browder only refer to 1320 4 lariat coins being struck in silver, there are also specimens of 1319 2 lariat coins to be found. So far, I have only personally seen the 1320 and 1319 silver coins in the British Museum in London and the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford. However, Bell in his main work, published in 1940, illustrates both of these coins that were almost certainly in his own private collection. 85  I have also received from a collector digital images of a 1319 silver coin in his collection. Apart from the latter coin, which was acquired in 1994, there are quite lengthy provenances for the other specimens.  The British Museum's coins were both presented in 1917 by Sir Robert Chalmers, Governor of Ceylon from 1913 to 1915. The Ashmolean's specimens were from the Philip Thorburn collection in 1966. His 1320 coin was originally purchased from a major London dealer in 1947, but it is not known precisely when or where Thorburn purchased the 1319 silver 2 lariat coin. Bell probably acquired his specimens in 1920 or 1922 during his visits there, but it could have been earlier, as he was in correspondence with a number of people who had provided him with specimens for his collection over many years. The important fact to bear in mind is that all of these specimens are from the same pairs of dies. While the 1320 4 lariat silver coins are all from a unique set of dies not encountered

84 Letter: Tim Browder to author, 9 June 1976 85 *H.C.P. Bell: Archaeologist of Ceylon and the Maldives*, Bethia N Bell and Heather M Bell, Archetype Publications, 1993, ISBN 1-873132-45x, p.258-259.  This extensive biography by two of his grand-daughters includes details of Bell's collections covering a wide range of subjects. He was an avid collector of Maldivian coins from as early as 1881 and mostly used his own specimens for illustrating his major 1940 work. Although he presented many items to the Colombo Museum he did not present any Maldivian coins, and his collection was probably sold privately to collectors in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) after his death in 1937.
elsewhere, the 1319 2 lariat coins were struck from obverse and reverse dies that had been used for regular bronze coins. However, it is more than likely that they were old dies that were still in the mint. All of the 1319 silver specimens studied show evidence of severe cracks on the reverse die and similar areas of damage on the obverse die.  I have bronze coin specimens in my own collection from the same dies that do not exhibit these die cracks, as well as images from other collectors of coins in their collections which show evidence of the die cracks, but not to the same degree as those found on the silver specimens. It is possible, therefore, that some individual presented to the Maldives Mint in Malé a small quantity of silver to be minted into coins of the current issues. This may well have been in AH 1320 ( AD 1903) so that old 1319 dies would have been used, but new 1320 dies would have been cut specially. Bell also mentions that any person tendering copper to the mint could get coins struck at 50% discount. 86 At this stage I am not illustrating examples of these coins, but would welcome hearing from anybody who has, or think they have, specimens of these silver coins in their collection.  My email address will be found at the end of this article. ***Conclusions*** As mentioned earlier, John Humphris suggested that the symbols on the 1318 and 1319 coins could be mintmarks, die cutter's marks or mint master's marks.  From van Laere's article it would seem that there was only one mint and mint master involved in the production of these coins and that he was also the one who cut all the dies.  It is, therefore, likely that that the symbols were intended to identify individual dies. This may be as a means of checking their efficiency or longevity in use, especially if different metals, such as phosphor bronze, were being used for the dies compared to what had been used previously. Another possible reason for the symbols would be to check the output of individual workers who were actually striking the coins. I did state earlier that there were five different types of symbols at a particular position to be found on the 1318 1 larin coins, and might speculate that one type of symbol could be specific to one of the five workers.  The argument against this is that there is one type of symbol (the five-dot star) that has many more different dies than others which only have one or two different types of symbol.  Also on the 1319 coins there does not appear to be any recognisable pattern of types, and there are certainly no pattern trends on the 1320 coins. Although I have examined around 80 specimens of the 1318 1 larin and almost 200 specimens of the 1319 2 lariat coins, it is obvious that certain types are encountered more often than others. Indeed there are one or two types of both dates that are only known by me from single specimens. One can wonder whether these types are from dies that were not used that often or were severely damaged early in their life and were withdrawn from use. I have examined over 50 specimens of the 1320 4 lariat coins and there do not appear to be any types that are known only by very few examples, apart from the silver coins. ***Acknowledgments*** While the majority of coins I have studied are in my own personal collection I would like to thank Drs Wolfgang Bertsch and Wolfgang Schuster, as well as Gylfi Snorrason and Hervé Thomas, for providing me with digital images of the coins in their collection, and encouraging me in my studies of the whole range of locally struck Maldivian coins.  I am also indebted to Dr Shailendra Bhandare, Ashmolean Museum, and Robert Bracey, British Museum, for allowing me to study once again their museums' collections of these coins. Although this article has been concentrating on one particular aspect of the locally struck coinage of Maldives, I am actively researching the whole series of these fascinating, but largely neglected, coins. I would welcome hearing from any other 86 Bell, page 79
collectors interested in the subject and can be contacted by email at p.budgen@btinternet.com. **THE DISCOVERY OF A RUPEE OF THE** **MUGHAL CLAIMANT, NIKUSIYAR.** By Jan Lingen and Dr Munaf Billoo Students of Mughal coins know from Dowson's condensed translation of Khafi Khan that "Coins of gold and silver were struck in the name of Nikusiyar", as Hodivala wrote in 1923 in his book, *Historical Studies in Mughal Numismatics*, XXIII. Coin couplets, p.325. At the time when Hodivala wrote his article, no coins of this claimant had been discovered and ever since, till very recently, no actual coin in the name of Nikusiyar has been reported 87. After the deposition of Farrukhsiyar at Delhi, the centre of danger appeared to be Akbarabad (Agra), where Nikusiyar and other members of the imperial house were in prison. A pretender might be set up from among these princes. Ghairat Khan, the Sayyids' nephew 88, was hurried off to his new government. A new commandant, Samandar Khan, was appointed on 25 April 1719 89 to take charge of the fort at Agra, but was refused admission by the Agra garrison, who had set up a rival emperor in the person of Prince Nikusiyar. Sahib-i-Qiran Muhammad Shah Nikusiyar Timur-i-Sani Padshah-i-Zaman was born in 1679 as the second son of Sultan Muhammad Akbar Mirza, the fourth son of Aurangzeb Alamgir. He was proclaimed the 13 th Mughal emperor and ascended the *musnaid* at Agra Fort on  8 May 1719. Nikusiyar had been a state prisoner and spent almost all his life within the walls of the harem of Agra Fort and finally in the Salimgarh jail at Delhi. Due to his life-long stay in the harem, he is said to have talked like a catamite and to have been generally ignored. The prime instigator of Nikusiyar's enthronement was Mitr Sen, a Nagar Brahman, who was raised to the rank of commander and the office of *Wazir*. Mitr Sen now became known as Rajah Birbal. At the same time a huge amount was withdrawn from the treasury to pay the arrears of the garrison. Hostilities were commenced by the garrison firing upon the mansion occupied by Ghairat Khan, the newly appointed *nazim* of the province. Nikusiyar's partisans, instead of coming out and taking advantage of Ghairat Khan's weakness, clung to the shelter of the fort walls. They lost, in this way, their only chance of striking a vigorous blow for their new master. Soon reinforcements from Delhi arrived and within a few days Ghairat Khan recovered from his surprise and was soon at the head of four or five thousand men and able to take the offensive. Husain Ali Khan, the younger of the Sayyid brothers, marched on Agra and reached Sikandra on 28 June 1719. The siege of Agra Fort, which had been commenced by his nephew was now effected with redoubled energy. The people within the fort expected help from Raja Jai Singh of Amber, but he kept aloof, waiting to see how the situation would develop. Overtures were made in the name of Nikusiyar to the Sayyid brothers, but in vain and, as no help came and foodstuff became dear, they were forced to surrender. On 2 August 1719 the garrison surrendered and Ghairat Khan was sent in with a force to take possession. Commandar Samandar Khan brought out Nikusiyar, placed him on an elephant

87 The gold coin (No. 953) in the *Catalogue of Indian coins in the British * *Museum; Mughal Emperors*, London 1892 and attributed there to Nikusiyar, has long been proved to be an  issue of Muhammad Shah with the title ' *ba-lutf-ullah badshah-I-zaman* '. 88 Ghairat Khan was the nephew of the Sayyid brothers (Abdullah Khan Qutb-ul-Mulk and Husain Ali Khan, known as the king-makers of that time. See: William Irvine, *Later Mughals*, Vol. I, sec. 8 Account of the Barha Sayyids. 89 All AD dates mentioned in this article are according to the Julian Calendar, for the present, Gregorian Calendar, add 11days.
*would have got it so wrong? Could there really have been two * *couplets used for such a short puppet "reign"? * *If  this coin does turn out to be genuine, then it is a very * *important discovery. Some of us, however, still need convincing\]* **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 207** ** ** Page ONS meeting, Oxford 2011 ONS conference Ukraine 2011 New and recent publications Auction news

Book review: K.K. Maheshwari *Imitation in continuity -  tracking the silver coinage of early medieval India* * (J. Cribb) * Corrigendum

An emergency coinage in Antioch AD 540-542, by S.J. Mansfield

New mint names for a Marinid half dirham type, by Ludovic Liétard

A new type for Marinid or early Wattasid silver coinage, by Ludovic Liétard

A new coin type of Dimitri I, King of Georgia: addendum, by I. Paghava, S. Turkia & G. Zlobin

A unique half dirham from the mint of Nakhjawan with the *ulugh mangyl ulus bek * legend, by I. Paghava & G. Janjgava

The Mongol conquest of Balkh according to numismatic sources, by Anton Grachev

The archaic punch-marked coins of Kuka ḍ i, Min ā river valley: part 1, by Amol Bankar

Gandhara and Indo-Greek fantasy coins, by Hans Loeschner

The Indo-Parthian coins in the British Museum, by Wannaporn Rienjang

Some recently discovered coins of the Sultans of Madura, Gujarat (and Khandesh), by Shailendra Bhandare

Some sultanate coins that refer to Sylhet, by Russel Haque & Nicholas Rhodes

A copper coin of Murshidabad, by Nicholas Rhodes

Coins of the Sikhs: *Zarb Sri Ambratsar Jiyo, * by Gurprit Singh Dora

Locally struck coinage of the Maldives: a die study of the final issues, by Peter Budgen

The discovery of a rupee of the Mughal claimant, Nikusiyar, by Jan Lingen & Dr Munaf Billoo

## ***Officers of the Society***

*Printed by Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, UK.     *