
set up the Oriental Coin Database. Another great source of inspiration was the director of Oriental Written Sources at the Moscow Academy of Sciences. ** ** People with similar experience came from Pakistan, the Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. The search continued for representatives from Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Mongolia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Xinjiang. In the US, there were two members thus far, and Dr Kolbas was the unpaid director. There were two official languages, English and Russian; and there were several projects at the planning stage. These included a Russian-English glossary of numismatic terms and a proper map for mints and geographic locations. One of the main objects was to digitise collections, both public and private, in Central Asia in order to put them on the website for free access. In addition, a library at the headquarters was proposed with copies of articles and books published in Central Asia, material almost completely absent from Western libraries. Also there were long-term plans to translate or at least to produce abstracts in English and Russian of major articles and to compile a specialised bibliography. Ultimately, there should be a significant increase in personal communication and better research in the field. The Oriental Numismatic Society had blazoned a trail by its meetings and publishing quite a number of articles on the subject, an excellent activity that the Institute intended to expand upon. ***The Kushan Coins Project*** * *

Robert Bracey reported on the Kushan Coins Project (KCP), which was a development of the work of Joe Cribb in his time at the department of Coins and Medals at the British Museum. During that time Joe had been actively involved in publishing articles on Kushan coins over the previous thirty years and also in supporting others working on the subject. Much of what he had shared and presented over the years remained, unfortunately, unpublished. The principle outcome of the KCP would be a new catalogue of the Kushan-related coins in the British Museum. This was being prepared at the moment and would be completed in 2011. The catalogue would include a discussion of the history of  the Kushan period for which the coins were so important. There would also be digital images of all the BM coins made available for researchers. The research hadalready yielded important results, including:

- A new understanding of the reduction in weight standards  under Kujula; - Typologies of late Kushan copper to the end of the dynasty  under Shaka and Kipunadha, which had a potentially enormous benefit for future archaeological work from central Asia to northern India; - Some resolution of the chronological problems of the dynasty,  the now infamous 'date of Kanishka'; - More precise understandings of the meaning of reverse types  and the procedures of the mints.

The series had proved sufficiently interesting that some of the diestudy techniques were of interest to other numismatic fields. Recently a presentation on the application of these to Judean coinage had been given given in London. Analysis of the coins had also shown that the mint exercised an unusually high degree of control over the gold content of the coins, a result which was important in understanding the purpose of the coinage. ***Progress report: The ANS Collection of Kushan Coins ***

David Jongeward (University of Toronto) kindly submitted a written report on the cataloguing project of the Kushan coins at the American Numismatic Society. Coinage of the Kushan empire that had thriven from the 1 st to 4 th century AD in a vast area of central Asia and northern India was known to numismatics and collectors primarily from two catalogues by Robert Göbl (1984, 1993). In 2005 David had initiated a plan to catalogue the American Numismatics Society collection of Kushan coins in collaboration with Joe Cribb. Their intention was to present an updated, reorganised catalogue based on numismatic findings of the last twenty years, including die analysis at the British Museum. In

2005, it was believed the ANS collection numbered about 600 coins. That count had expanded to nearly 1400 coins, thanks in large part to Peter Donovan's efforts in tracking down, recording, and arranging for photography of every Kushan coin he had been able to find distributed among several ANS cabinets, including a number of boxes and trays with unsorted contents. Over 200 of the coins were gold, a few were silver, the remainder were copper. In addition to coinage of the Kushan kings, the catalogue would include Kushano-Sasanian coinage, as well as coins of the Kidarite Kushan. Appendices would highlight the varieties of gold coin portraits of Huvishka as found on ANS coins, another would feature the Kushan pantheon of deities. The project had endured a number of starts and stops due to other publishing commitments for both authors. During the previous year, however, he had worked at length again with Joe Cribb in London and Peter Donovan at the ANS. He estimated that the ANS Kushan catalogue was already 85% complete. Sections of the catalogue that included coinage of the first three kings would be submitted to the ANS in January 2011. If all went well, the catalogue should be submitted in full by the summer of that year. ***A Christian Principality in the Seventh Century Bukharan Oasis*** * *

Aleksandr Naymark (Hofstra University) discussed a series of relatively rare non-epigraphic coins carrying, on one side, an image of an animal (four types have a lion and one a deer) and, on the other, an equilateral broadfooted cross.

All but one coin of this series had been found in the Bukharan oasis. As no single specimen had come from a hoard or a clear "archaeological" context, the series could be dated only on the basis of comparative analysis. Struck on cast blanks, lion/cross coins were very similar to the third and fourth types of the Bukharan camel coinage (second quarter of the 7 th century), which were also characterised by severely succinct design and iconography. The date of the lion/cross coins, given that there were five types, fell into the second and third quarters of the seventh century. Yet these coins were not the issues of Bukhara itself - they found no place in the main sequence of coin series issued by the Bukharan mint and thus obviously represented a coinage of a different polity. The most plausible candidate for such a role was the principality of Vardana in the northern part of the Bukharan oasis, which in Chinese sources was sometimes called Lesser Bukhara (An). Around the middle of the seventh century, the Bukharan mint had switched to the Chinese cash model and started casting coins: the first were simple imitations of Kaiyuan Tongbao, but then the Bukharan tamgha had been added on the reverse, and, after that, two types had been issued carrying Sogdian inscriptions, the Bukharan tamgha and a sign of a cross. --- ---
Congratulations to numismatist, Mohammed Younis, for  passing his doctoral defence with the highest possible mark in a four hour session recently before a committee at Cairo University. The topic of Mohammed's thesis was "Monetary circulation in Shiraz between the beginning of the Salghurids and the end of the Muzaffarids". In the style of a mint corpus, he collected all relevant material and discussed it using appropriate literary sources; in so doing he made a number of notable new additions to our picture of the history of Shiraz. He spent two years working and studying at the Oriental Coin Cabinet at Jena University and also profited a lot from the expertise and advice of Lutz Ilisch and the collection at Tübingen University. The committee recommended the publishing of the thesis and it is hoped to see the reworked version in due course. (Information thanks to Stefan Heidemann). Congratulations, also, to Aram Vardanyan for obtaining his doctorate at Tübingen University in December.

**\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* ** ***3*** ***rd*** *** Simone Assemani symposium on Islamic coinage *** This symposium will take place at the Sapienza University of Rome, 23-25 September 2011. The proposed topic is ** ** *Umayyad * *Coinage in Context:  from the Byzantine and late Sasanian time to * *the early 'Abbasid period (7* *th* *** *** *-8* *th* *** *** *century).* Possible themes that could be tackled are: - • Coinage during transitional periods (late Umayyad - early  'Abbasid issues); - • Arab-Byzantine and Arab-Sasanian coinages: chronology  and iconography; - • Contacts between Umayyad coinage and mediaeval  Europe, Central Asia and the Orient; - • Coin production and circulation (study of coin hoards,  analysis of the output of one or more mints, etc); - • Literary sources related to the Umayyad coinage system;  - • Palaeography of coin inscriptions.  Presentations can be in English, French, German and Italian and should not exceed 20/25 minutes in most circumstances. Anyone wishing to participate in the symposium should contact wither Bruno Callegher or Arianna D'Ottone for additional information. Their e-mail addresses are: bcallegher@units.it; arianna.dottone@uniroma1.it ** ** **Review ** ** ** *Gold Coins in the Collection of the Asiatic Society* (by the late Rita Devi Sharma), edited by Sutapa Sinha. pp.xiv,138. The Asiatic Society, Kolkata, April 2010, Price Rs.2500 (USD 250).

The collection of coins in The Asiatic Society in Kolkata does not rank highly among collections of coins in the sub-continent, but none of the coins in it have previously been made available to scholars. The Society is the oldest of the various societies in the world devoted to Asian Studies, having been established by Sir William Jones in 1783, a full fifty years before the Royal Asiatic Society in London. It has a Museum and Library which is truly remarkable, and which has been built up over more than two centuries. Although the Society has received numerous valuable coins by way of donation over the years, most of these have been transferred to the Indian Museum, also in Kolkata, in and after 1866, and are not included in this slim volume. How and why the 121 objects that are described here have remained in the custody of the Society is not known, and all records associated with their acquisition have apparently been lost. In view of the obvious value of the gold coins, and the lack of any record of their existence, it was decided in 1997 that it was important to publish a catalogue of these coins, partly to make the data available to scholars, and partly to enhance security. Dr Rita Sharma of the National Museum in Delhi was entrusted with this task. She had produced a draft catalogue by 2007, but her tragic death in a train crash delayed the publication even further. After that, Sutapa Sinha of Kolkata, who specialises in the coins of the Sultans of Bengal, took on the role of writing an introduction and bringing the

publication to completion. This she has now done, and the results have been published to a high standard by the Asiatic Society, although it is surprising that the late Rita Sharma is not mentioned as the main author. The slim volume contains fine photographs and vital statistics of one hundred and twenty one golden objects, including eighteen which are unidentified bullion items and probably not coins at all. The coins are not sequentially numbered, but can be referenced by accession no. and page, although it is not explained what the logic behind the accession numbers is. Of the coins, there are 2 Kushan staters, and the remainder are mainly south Indian fanams, curiously called here 'panams', since that is apparently closer to the Sanskrit word. It is clear from the descriptions that neither the late Rita Sharma, nor Sutapa Sinha are experts on south Indian coins, and the descriptions and attributions should not be accepted uncritically. For example, Accn No.4/13, described as "South Indian Ruler (unidentified)" is actually a coin of King Ś ivasimha of Nepal, datable to c. AD  1100. Coins of this type are quite often found in Bihar, as well as in Nepal, but as far as this reviewer is aware, they have never been found in South India. Other misattributions should have picked up by the editor, such as Acc.No.3/21 on p.108 is of Shah 'Alam Bahadur ( AD 1707-12), not Shah 'Alam II ( AD 1759-1806) and Acc.No.3/13 is too heavy and crude to be a genuine mohur of Akbar, and must be one of the numerous copies that are found. Also Acc.No.3/2 on p.52 appears to be a south Indian coin rather than a Rajput coin, as described. Among the foreign gold coins there are five Ottoman sequins, all of the mint of Misr (Egypt) and it would have  been interesting to have the find spot of these pieces, which have rarely been published with an Indian provenance. There are also three apparently genuine Venetian sequins and three coins described as "Malay". It is mentioned in the introduction that these Malay coins come from the Acheh province of northern Sumatra, which has been part of Indonesia since defeat by the Dutch in the 1870s. Interestingly, the first of these, in the name of a Sultan Muhammad, is actually of the rulers of Pasai, and has traditionally been dated to the period AD 1290s-1326, although it is only in a forthcoming article that a 15 th century date is to be proposed by the present reviewer, the date given by Rita Sharma. In conclusion, although it is nice to know about the gold coins that are preserved in the museum of the Asiatic Society, the paucity of their holdings is a disappointment. It is not mentioned whether the collection also extends to silver and base metal coins, but unless there are some surprises, it is doubtful if a catalogue is warranted. Few scholars will derive any benefit from the information in this present volume, and the price of US $250 is presumably designed to ensure that the costs of production are recouped by the minimal international sales that may be expected.

## Articles

**TWO SELEUCID COPPERS FROM THE ** **BUKHARAN OASIS ** ** ** By Aleksandr Naymark (New York) & Aleksei Yakovlev (Moscow) ** ** The extreme paucity of information about Hellenistic Transoxiana has made coin finds the principal source of information about the historical geography of the region. The most precious for us are coppers: the lack of intrinsic value confined their circulation to the territories of the issuing states \[Zeimal' 1975, 58; Zeimal' 1978, 193\] so that the limits of their geographic dispersion mark political boundaries. Unfortunately, there is one thing that is in short supply: documented finds of Hellenistic coins are rare instances in Sogdiana. Relatively weak by themselves, Hellenistic archaeological strata of this country are commonly covered with much more significant cultural deposits of later periods. Aside from fortification structures, which are, of course, not a good source of coin finds, only one building of Hellenistic period has
sites with this name in eastern Soghd. The second case comprises "two copper coins of Alexander the Great" which the Russian popular magazine "Vsemirnaia Illustratsiia" \[no. 260, p. 477\] reported in 1873 as having been found "near ** ** Samarqand **."** The striking "modesty" of this "sensational information" - just two copper coins - appears very prosaic against the background of the usual, highly exaggerated "reports" and thus makes this information quite credible. In other words, altogether 11 early Hellenistic coppers have been registered in Sogdiana. For the period from Alexander to 200 BC, Sogdian soil has yielded 8 silver coins. While these figures are not very significant, they become very telling, if we compare them to the numbers of the 2 nd century

BC, where we know only 6 silver coins, three hoards of silver and no single copper specimen. It is clear that the Greeks lost control over Sogdiana some time prior to 200 BC. Given the small number of coins at our disposal, further conclusions are less firm, but there are nevertheless some indications as to when this could happen. With a single exception of one poorly documented find of Euthydemus' coin from Afrasiab in 1928 \[Masson 1950, 158\], coppers of the 3 rd century

BC represent Seleucid and early Diodotid coinage. It is likely that, after a half a century of Seleucid rule, Sogdiana was inherited by Diodotus, who seceded from the Empire in the middle of the 3 rd century, but that it never passed to Euthydemus. Such an early date for the collapse of Greek power is supported by independent considerations: imitative coinages, which started in Samarqand (Antiochus imations) and South Sogdiana (imitations of types of Alexander) following the collapse of Greek power, accepted Seleucid rather than Graeco-Bactrian types for their models, which could happen only if Seleucid coins remained the most authoritative "currency" on the market. The same logic is applicable to the case of Euthydemus imitations minted in the Bukharan oasis except that, of course, the reason for the abundance of Euthydemus' tetradrachms on the Bukharan market was quite different - as with later coins of Varahran V, Peroz, and Kawad, which led to the appearance of long imitational series. This was indemnity money paid by the ruler of a sedentary empire to its nomadic neighbours. We should, however, leave this discussion for another article. * * *Bibliography * Baratin and Martinez-Seve 2010 - Charlotte Baratin and Laurianne Martinez-Seve. "Samarcande à l'époque hellenistique." - *Dossiers d'Archéologie* 341, sept.-oct. 2010 Bernard 1985 - Paul Bernard. *Fouilles d'Ai-Khanoum IV. Les * *monnaies hors trésors. Questions d'histoire gréco-bactrienne* ( *MDAFA*, tome XXVIII). Paris: Boccard, 1985 Bernard and Guillaume 1980 - Paul Bernard and Olivier Guillaume. "Monnaies inédites de la Bactriane Grecque à AiKhanoum (Afghanistan)." - *Revue Numismatique N* 1980 (6 e série, tome XXII) Ernazarova 1971 -- T.S. Ernazarova. * Denezhnoe obrashchenie * *Samarkanda po arkheologo-numizmatichekim dannym \[The * *Monetary * *Circulation * *of * *Samarqand * *according * *to * *Archaeological and Numismatic Data\] Synopsis of Ph.D. Thesis.* Tashkent, 1971 Houghton and Lorber 2002 - *Seleucid Coins. A Comprehensive * *Catalogue* by Arthur Houghton and Catharine Lorber with Metrological Tables by Brian Kritt. Part I, vols. I and II. New York: The American Numismatic Society, 2002 Kritt 1996 - Brian Kritt. *Seleucid Coins of Bactria.* Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Classical Numismatic Group, 1996 ( *Classical * *Numismatic Studies, * no. 1) Kritt 2001 - Brian Kritt. *Dynastic Transitions in the Coinage of * *Bactria. * *Antiochus-Diodotus-Euthydemus.* Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Classical Numismatic Group, 2001 ( *Classical * *Numismatic Studies* no. 4) Kurbanov and Niiazova 1989 -- G. Kurbanov and M. Niiazova. *Katalog greko-baktriskikh monet iz fondov Bukharskogo muzeia * *\[Catalogue of Graeco-Bactrian Coins in the Collection of the * *Bukharan Museum\]. * Bukhara, 1989

| diameter | of 29 mm. The inscriptions on the coin are as follows: |
|:--- |:--- |
| Obverse: |  |
| ÜG É@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@»G Ü |  |
| Êf@@@@@@@@@@@@@@YË "A |  |
| É» ¸@@@@@@@@@@@@Íjq Ü |  |
| " ©Î¡@@@@@@@@@@@@À»A |  |
| Ó¼§ ÌIA É»Ëf»A Åºi |  |
| ÉÍÌI |  |
| \*I would like to | thank Alexander Akopyan and Said Soleymani for |
| their | kind help during the work on this paper. |
| \[\{In the name of Allāh was struck this\} dirham in Ardabīl | the |
|:--- |:--- |
| year of (seven?) \{and | fifty and three hundred\}\]. |

*Fig. 1 * As most of the marginal legend on this coin is illegible   some preliminary historical notes need to be given to understand when this coin was struck. In Rama ḍā n of AH 346, the Sall ā rid, Marzub ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad - Mu ẓ affar, passed away, because of illness, in Adharbayj ā n.  Before his death, he willed that his brother, Wahsud ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad, should take his place. But, secretly, he ordered his commanders to give all the castles to his sons: firstly to Just ā n b. Marzub ā n; then, if he died, they should be given to Ibr ā h ī m b. Marzub ā n and, if he too died, to N āṣ ir b. Marzub ā n. Only if all of his sons died, should power be given to his brother, Wahs ū d ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad. In addition  to these three listed sons, Marzub ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad had a son named Kaykhusraw, who was not mentioned in his last will because he was a child. 2 After the death of Marzub ā n, Wahs ū d ā n went to take control of the castles, but faced opposition. The guards refuse to cooperate with him. Wahs ū d ā n found out that everything had changed, and came back to Tarom 3 with intense hatred for his nephews' and his brother's conspiracy. After these events, Just ā n was crowned as the new ruler and was recognised by his brothers. Just ā n chose Ab ū c Abdall ā h N ā ym ī as his vizier, and all commanders and sardars accepted his rule except Just ā n b. Sharmazan, the governor of Armin ī ya. After a short time, Just ā n b. Marzub ā n arrested his vizier, who was the father-in-law of c Ubaydall ā h b. Mu ḥ ammad b. Ḥ amdawayh, the vizier of Just ā n b. Sharmazan. This action motivated c Ubaydall ā h to encourage Just ā n b. Sharmazan to engage in trickery, the aim being to invite Ibr ā h ī m b. Marzub ā n from Armin ī ya to Urmiya with the promise of help to crown him in place of  his brother, Just ā n. 2 Ibn Miskawayh. *Taj* ā *rab al-'umam*. Tehr ā n, SH 1376. Vol. IV. P. 212. 3 Tarom is an area between Qazv ī n and Gil ā n, *cf*.: Ya'q ū t Hamaw ī. *Mu* *c* *jam * *al-buld* ā *n*. Tehr ā n, 1380. Vol I. P. 697.

When Just ā n b. Marzub ā n was in Barda c a, Ibr ā h ī m, in cooperation with Just ā n b. Sharmazan, captured Mar ā gha. Just ā n b. Marzub ā n, in order to control this rebellion, promised to free his vizier, Naym ī, and accept the offers of the rebels. At this, Just ā n b. Sharmazan and Mu ḥ ammad b. Ḥ amdawayh abandoned Ibr ā h ī m and came back to Urmiya to complete the walls of the city. Ibr ā h ī m, thus abandoned by his allies, sought and obtained forgiveneness.  Meanwhile, N ā ym ī had been released (or had run away) and went to Mugh ā n, where he heard that somebody in Gil ā n had named himself al-Mustajir bi-All ā h b. Muqtaf ī and declared himself the true Abbasid Caliph. 4 Naym ī invited al-Mustajir and Just ā n b. Sharmazan and united them. The war between al-Mustajir and his allies against the troops of Ibr ā h ī m and Just ā n b. Marzub ā n took place in AH 349. Al-Mustajir lost the war and was arrested by Just ā n b. Marzub ā n. Just ā n b. Sharamaz ā n and his vizier fled towards Urmiya, while al-Mustajir was executed or died in prison. On the other hand, Wahs ū d ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad attempted to forge a conspiracy amongst Marzub ā n's sons. His efforts had no effect on Ibr ā h ī m but, in due course, he managed to encourage N āṣ ir to rebel against his brother's rule. Just ā n, who had lost all of his money and many of his troops in the war against * * al-Mustajir bi-All ā h and Just ā n b. Sharmazan, had no choice but to leave Ardab ī l and hurry to the castle of Niy ā r. 5 After some time, N āṣ ir became aware of  his uncle Wahs ū d ā n's plotting and was ashamed about what he had done. He apologized   to his brother and they returned to Ardab ī l. Unfortunately, they had lost all of their treasure because of the civil war and they were not able to pay the army. At this juncture, they thought the best way to solve their problems was to seek help from Wahs ū d ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad. Once they felt sufficiently confident about their uncle Wahs ū d ā n, Just ā n and N āṣ ir accepted his invitation, and went to meet him with their mother. Wahs ū d ā n broke his promise. He arrested them and put them in prison. Wahs ū d ā n then appointed his son, Isma c ī l, as commander of Shemir ā n castle, 6 and sent his commander, Ab ū 'lQ ā sim Sharmazan b. Mishak ī, to Ardab ī l, where he captured the city. Ibr ā h ī m was in Armin ī ya when he heard of what had happened to his brothers and his mother, and moved his army towards Ardab ī l. Wahs ū d ā n ordered his nephews and their mother to be killed, and he sent Sharmazan b. Mishak ī and Ḥ usayn b. Mu ḥ ammad b. Raww ā d to help Isma c ī l. They defeat Ibr ā h ī m, and he was forced to flee to Armin ī ya. Thereupon, Mar ā gha, too, was captured by Just ā n b. Sharmazan. Despite what had happened, in AH 350 the caliph recognised Ibr ā h ī m as governor of Adharbayj ā n. 7 Once again, Ibr ā h ī m, as he had done in Armin ī ya, began to prepare himself to do battle with Wahs ū d ā n. The death of  Isma c ī l b. Wahs ū d ā n encouraged Ibr ā h ī m to attack Ardab ī l. He captured the city and then attacked Tarom. This was in AH 354 or 355. Wahs ū d ā n, on this occasion, avoided battle with his nephew. In AH 355 Wahs ū d ā n sent Sharmazan b. Mishk ī towards Ardab ī l to wage war on Ibr ā h ī m. Ibr ā h ī m was defeated, lost all his army and fled alone to Rayy. The Buwayhid ruler, Rukn al-Dawla ( AH 335-366), was the husband of Ibr ā h ī m's sister, so Ibr ā h ī m received a warm welcome in Rayy. Rukn al-Dawla sent his vizier, Ibn Am ī d, along with Ibr ā h ī m, with a large army to capture Adharbayj ā n and reinstate him there as ruler. Ibn Am ī d captured Adharbayj ā n for him and forced every one, even Just ā n b. Sharmazan, to obey Ibr ā h ī m. But, at the same time, Ibn Am ī d, in a letter to Rukn al-Dawla, informed him and warned him about the future of Ibr ā h ī m, that after the evacuation of the Buwayhid army, Ibr ā h ī m would lose control of Adharbayj ā n. According to Ibn Miskawayh, Ibn Amid's prediction

4 Vardanyan. *Op. cit*. P. 11. 5 According to Ibn Miskawayh, this was a castle near Ardab ī l. Nowadays, it is a village near Ardab ī l with the same name 6 Shamir ā n was a castle in Tarom, *cf*.: Ḥ amdallah Mostowf ī. *Nuzhat al-* *Qul* ū *b*. Tehr ā n, 1381. P. 107. 7 Ibn Miskawayh. P. 226-228
came true. After the Buwayhid army left Azerb control of his kingdom.  He was arrested  and prisoner (maybe with Wahs ū d ā n ibn Mu ḥ am Sharmazan). The subsequent events of AH 356 in detail in Vardanyan's article. 8 According to numismatic data, no Sallarid of any Buwayhid, as overlord, until AH 355 9. From that year, as mentioned above, Ibr ā h Azerbaijan with the support of Rukn al Buwayhid, and we have coinage of Ibr ā h ī m Rukn al-Dawla until 356 10. In AH 357 11 we have a coin that was struc names of Wahs ū d ā n b. Mu ḥ ammad and Sharm without the name of Rukn al-Dawla. It would year, Ibrahim was defeated and arrested; we h his rule after this date. For the dating of our coin, the first clue is caliph al-Mu ṭī c li-ll ā h, AH 334-363. On our names of Sall ā r al-Man ṣū r Ibr ā h ī m b. Marzub Marzub ā n and of Rukn al-Dawla Ab ū c Al ī. T cited on the other coins of Ibr ā h ī m in AH 355 should be dated to the same period (the pe influence in Adharbayj ā n). It is more possible t was struck in AH 356-357 (perhaps in AH 357, a what could be the number '7'). It seems tha Wahs ū d ā n's name from his coins and added hi name in late 356 or the beginning of 357. Thi consequence of Sharmazan being sent ag capturing Ardab ī l in AH 357. 12 About Kaykhusraw there is only one other *al-* Ā *dab* ā *'*, 13 at the description of the events Fakhr al-Dawla Buwayhid ( AH 359-387). He Marzub ā n b. Sall ā r is named among his relativ Wahs ū d ā n and Ḥ aydar b. Wahs ū d ā n and some governors of Fakhr al-Dawla. Thus, Kaykhusr AH 387 and was one of the amirs of Fakhr al-Da

# A NEW DINAR FROM SA

By Yahya Jafar ** ** *This article introduces a new Yemeni dinar f* *Sana'a*

An apparently unpublished Zaidi dinar from dated 400h bearing the name al-Im ā m Mu ḥ am al- Ḥ usain al-Zaid ī fills another of the m numismatic history of Sana'a. Although this d be classified as a Rassid coin, it should, classified as a Zaidi dinar. It is probably the o the full name of the ruler is given on its rever "al-Zaid ī ". The first promoter of the Zaidi sect of Islam concepts are related to Im ā m Zaid b. 'Al ī b. a Ab ī Ṭā lib, was al-Im ā m al-Q ā sim b. Ibr ā h ī m b - al- Ḥ asan b. 'Al ī b. Ab ī Ṭā lib, who was the c of Profit Mu ḥ ammed's daughter, F āṭ ima. Al *laqab* al-Rass ī because he started from Jebal Thus Al-Q ā sim al-Rass ī started his vocation, moved to al-K ū fa; ultimately, he returned homeland at Jebal al-Rass in 246h. Thereafter, H ā d ī il ā al- Ḥ aq who continued his mission of p concept in Yemen in 283h.

8 Vardanyan. *Op. cit*. P. 16. 9 Vardanyan. *Op. cit*. Types 8, 9,10,11,12,13,14,15,1 10 Vardanyan. *Op. cit*. Types 20,21. 11 Vardanyan. *Op. cit*. Types 22 12 Vardanyan. *Op. cit*. Type 22. 13 *Mu* *c* *jam al-* Ā *dab* ā *'*. Vol. VI. P. 75. Cited by *Sh* ā *hriyar* ā *n-e gomn* ā *m*. Tehr ā n, SH 1385. P. 123. bayjan,  Ibr ā h ī m lost d sent to a castle as mmad or Just ā n ibn 6-361 are described coins cite the name

h ī m took control of l-Dawla Ab ū c Al ī m with the name of k  in Ardab ī l in the mazan b. Mishk ī, and appear that, in this have no evidence of the regnal period of coin there are the b ā n, Kaykhusraw b.

The last name was 5-356, so this coin eriod of Buwayhid that the present coin as there is a trace of at Ibr ā h ī m removed is younger brother's is action might be a ainst Ibr ā h ī m and mention in *Mu* *c* *jam *

after the death of ere Kaykhusraw b. ves, Just ā n b. N ū h b. others, as amirs and raw was  alive until awla.

# ANA'A *from the mint of * the mint of Sana'a mmed b. al-Q ā sim b. many gaps in the dinar could possibly

as mentioned, be only dinar in which rse, with his title as

mic Shi'ism, whose al- Ḥ usain b. 'Al ī b. - Ism ā ' ī l b. Ibr ā h ī m cousin and husband l-Q ā sim carried the

al-Rass in Arabia. first in Egypt then d and died in his it  was  al-Im ā m alpromoting the Zaidi 16,17,18,19 - Kasrav ī Tabriz ī.

Although many Imams ruled the first period of Zaidi rule, 28 referred to as "Rassid" despite t related to al-Q ā sim al-Rass ī. It is the Zaidi and Rassi rulers are descendants of Im ā m 'Al ī b. Ab branches on the family tree and conflict with each other. For inst descendant, al-Im ā m al-Man ṣū r were descendants of Im ā m al- Ḥ as al H ā d ī il ā al- Ḥ aq Ya ḥ y ā b. al Ḥ u - 'Al ī b. Im ā m Ḥ usain b. 'Al Mu ḥ ammed b. al-Q ā sim, whose direct  descendant of Im ā m Zaid b Ṭā lib. The history of Yemen, in gen the turn of the fifth century, is vag Da'i (368-403h) was the genera briefly occupied Sana'a. In 389h, Ayy ā n ī (389-393) rose in defian Shar ī f al-Q ā sim b. al- Ḥ usain al-Z Al-Q ā sim al-Zaid ī quickly grew Ayy ā n ī and sought independence. and was succeeded by his so Mu ḥ ammad was then invited to ru that he arrived there in 401h 14. ordered by this Mu ḥ ammad b. shows that he was in Sana'a one y he was only able to stay there for was reported that he was  subs vicinity of the city. Mu ḥ ammad al-Zaid ī 's full *nas* al- Ḥ usain b. Mu ḥ ammad b. al- Ḥ u - Ya ḥ y ā b. al- Ḥ usain b. Zaid 16 b Ṭā lib.

| 14 | Mohammed b. Mohammed b. Y |
|:--- |:--- |
| Cairo 1998 (in Arabic) |  |
| 15 | Mohammed Yahya al-Haddad, G |
| Sana 2004 (Arabic) |  |
| 16 | The founder of the Zaidi sect. |

##   اله ا ﷲ وحده  شريك له محمد رسول ﷲ

## Outer Obv.: بعد و يومئذ يفرح المؤمنين بنصر ﷲ

## Inner Obv.: لدينار بصنعا سنة ( اربعمـ sic)

## Rev.: ان الباطل كان زھوقا و تنزل من القران ما ھو شفاء

d various parts of Yemen during 84-444h, their coinage is usually

the fact that not all are directly s worth noting that, although, all

e related in that they are all b ī Ṭā lib, they represent different

were often in disagreement and tance, al-Q ā sim al-Rass ī and his

al-Q ā sim al-Ayy ā n ī (389-393h), san b. 'Al ī b. Ab ī Ṭā lib, whereas, usain was a descendant of 'Omar l ī b. Ab ī Ṭā lib. Further, Im ā m

name is on this dinar,  was a - 'Al ī b. al- Ḥ usain b. 'Al ī b. Ab ī neral, and Sana'a, in particular, at

gue and quite complex. Y ū suf alally acknowledged  Imam who

al-Im ā m al-Man ṣū r al-Q ā sim alnce of Y ū suf. He appointed alZaid ī to represent him in Sana'a.

in strength, rebelled against al. However, he was killed in 394h on, Mu ḥ ammad, in Thammar. ule in Sana'a and it was reported

This coin, however, which was al-Q ā sim b. al- Ḥ usain al-Zaid ī, year earlier, in 400h. Reportedly, r one and a half months 15 when it sequently killed in 403h in the

*sab* is Mu ḥ ammad b. al-Q ā sim b. usain b. Mu ḥ ammad b. al-Q ā sim - 'Al ī b. al- Ḥ usain b. 'Al ī b. Ab ī ** ** eter and weighs 2.11g. On the

such coinage in that it carries the rse with Sura 9:33 of the *Qur'an* everse centre shows that it was. al-Q ā sim b. al- Ḥ usain al-Zaid ī, d to be the son of the Messenger ineage to the profit Mu ḥ ammad.

*al-Israa * 17:81 of the *Qur'an*, Yahya b. Zubara, Tarikh al -Zaidiya, General History of Yemen, 2 nd Vol.,

## امر به ا مام محمد بن القاسم بن الحسين الزيدي بن رسول ﷲ

## 2 ا مر من قبل و من ب

## بسم ﷲ ضرب ھذا ال

## جاء الحق و زھق الباطل ا ---
| 'Alīd origin as well? What is | interesting and, so far, unexplained |
|:--- |:--- |
| is that not all of the coin types of either the Ja'farid or Shaddādid |  |
| rulers bore the title the sayyid in their legends (for instance, the 7 |  |
| so far known coin types of 'Alī b. Ja'far, the father of Ja'far III b. |  |
| 'Alī did not bear it51, whereas some coins of Faḍl I and 'Alī al- |  |
| Lashkarī II featured it and some did not52). On the other hand, |  |
| Qaṭrān Tabrīzī named only Ja'far III b. 'Alī the sayyid, but not any |  |
| Shaddādid rulers53. Last but not least, according to the numismatic |  |
| data, the Shirvānshāhs expressed 'Alīdophile sentiments too, at |  |
| least at a slightly earlier period (AH 373, i.e. 982/3)54. |  |
| Acknowledgments |  |
| We would like to express our profound gratitude to Dr G. Beradze |  |
| for his ever kind support of our research. |  |
| References |  |
| 1. |  |
| Akopyan-Vardanyan | - Akopyan A., Vardanyan A. "A |

47 *Lebedev-Markov-Koyfman 2006:17-40, 71.* 48 The AD dates for the beginning of the reign of Fa ḍ l I, the beginning and end of the reign of 'Al ī al-Lashkar ī II, and the beginning of the reign of Sh ā wur, are given according to V. Minorsky, the text of the primary source itself apparently containing no precise indications \[ *Minorsky 1953:16,18-* *19* \]. 49 In contrast to the authors' statement \[ *Lebedev-Markov-Koyfman * *2006:72* \], we did not manage to find this on the illustrated coins of Sh ā wur or in the legends on his coins copied out by the authors (Cf. *Ibid.:46-53* ). 50 *Ibid.:9. * There is an extensive literature on this topic; its review is not within the scope of this work. 51 *Japaridze 1991, 1997, 1998; Paghava-Turkia 2009. * 52 *Lebedev-Markov-Koyfman 2006:17-40, 71.* 53 *Personal communication from G. Beradze.* 54 *Akopyan-Vardanyan.  *

7.  *Kasravi 1976 * - \[Kasravi A. *The Forgotten Rulers. * 4 th ed. Tehran, 2535 (1976).\]     (Original text in Persian: 2535, ØCnæP. ' ÔDÚÖ Ê ØCmDénæv '. èÜnsÂ jÖbC ). 8.  *Lebedev-Markov-Koyfman 2006 * - \[Lebedev V., Markov D., Koyfman A. *Monetary Activities and Monetary Circulation * *of the Ganja Emirate of Shaddadids (the Middle of the 10* *th* *-* *11* *th* * C.)*. Moscow: Numismatic Literature, 2006.\] (Original text in Russian: Лебедев В. П., Марков Д. Б., Койфман А. А. Монетное * * дело * * и * * монетное * * обращение * * Ганджийского * * эмирата * * Шаддадидов * (* сер *. X - XI * вв *.)*. Москва: Нумизматическая литература, 2006.) 9.  *Mayer 2005* - \[Mayer T. (Editor). *Sylloge of Coins of * *Caucasus and Eastern Europe*. Wiesbaden, 2005.\] (Original text in German: Mayer T. (bearbeitet von). *Sylloge der * *Münzen des Kaukasus und Osteuropas*. Wiesbaden, 2005.) 10. *Minorsky 1953 * - Minorsky V. *Studies in Caucasian History. * *I. New Light on the Shadd* ā *dids of Ganja. II. The Shadd* ā *dids * *of Ani. III. Prehistory of Saladin*. London: Taylor's Foreign Press, 1953. 11. *Paghava-Turkia 2009 - * Paghava I., Turkia S. "A New Early  Coin Type of 'Al ī b. Ja'far, Emir of Tiflis, Citing the Caliph Al-T ā ' ī ' li-ll ā h". *Journal of Oriental Numismatic Society*, #199, Spring 2009. P. 7-9. 12. *Pakhomov 1970 * - \[Pakhomov E. Coins of Georgia. Tbilisi:  Metsniereba, 1970.\] (Original text in Russian: Пахомов Е. Монеты Грузии. Тбилиси: Мецниереба, 1970). 13. *Qa* ṭ *r* ā *n Tabriz* ī * 1954 - * \[Qa ṭ r ā n Tabr ī z ī. *Div* ā *n. * ed.  Mohammad Nakhjav ā n ī. Tabriz, 1333 (1954).\] (Original text in Persian: 1333, pénMP. ëÙCÝYgÙ jÖcÕ ÔDÖQåDL. ' ØCÝéi '.èpénMP ØCn©¾ ). 14. *Turkia-Paghava 2008* - Turkia S., Paghava I. "The Coinage  of Ja'far III B. 'Al ī, Emir of Tiflis". *Journal of Oriental * *Numismatic Society*, #197, Autumn 2008. P. 5-11. **INFLUENCE OF KANNADA IN THE GOLD ** **COINS OF THE ELURU HOARD ** By Govindraya Prabhu Sanoor

***Overview *** In the year 2009, a hoard of gold coins of the Chalukyas of Vengi, Nagas of Chakrakuta and Matsyas of Oddadi were found (approximately 70 in number, of which only 70 were witnessed) in Eluru, West Godavari district, Andhra Pradesh.  The bulk of the gold punch-marked coins were of the Nagas of Chakrakuta.  In the hoard only four coins were of the Vengi Chalukyas and one was of the Matsyas.  The hoard was found by chance when the land was being ploughed. The Nagas were independent for most of their reign.  It is not understood how, when and why these coins came to the capital city of the Vengi rulers. Perhaps the hoard was a possession of the royal family, where currencies of more than one king were always common, due to trade or allegiances.  Perhaps the former is more likely as the Nagas were independent for most of the time, except for their allegiance to the Chalukyas of Badami in the beginning. This paper sets out to explain the dynastic history and the significance of the coins in this hoard. Shown below is part of a modern political map of South India with the area of focus.  The locations of Eluru, Vaddadi (the old name is Oddadi) and Jagdalpur (Chakrakuta Mandala) are shown in the map using bulb symbols. The presence of coins of three dynasties in a single hoard is, as we have already suggested,
The Rajapura plates 57 dated to AD 1065, and in the name of Madurantakadeva are about the compensation to be paid for human sacrifice victims. The Madurantakadeva mentioned in the epigraph is perhaps the ruler of Chola. The record refers to the capital as Bhramarakotya Mandala, which is the other name of Chakrakuta Mandala 58. The record mentions the grant of Rajapura village along with 70 Gadyanaka, perhaps a compensation given to the family of the human sacrifice. Human sacrifice to Danteswari of Danteshwara, Bastar, was common even in the recent past, perhaps a ritualistic belief followed since the days of the Naga kings. Human sacrifice is celebrated as a public oblation or whenever any natural disasters or diseases, death by tigers or wild beasts increases. The Vengi Chalukyas were relatively weak, so that they had to live in alliance with and under the protection of the Cholas. Dharavarsha was a vassal of Someshvara I of the Western Chalukyas. To counter an attack by the Cholas, Someshvara I sought the help of Dharavarsha and the Eastern Ganga ruler, Vajrahasta III. Chalukya records mention that Virarajendra defeated the mighty Chalukya forces near the banks of the Tungabhadra. Madurantaka mentioned in the above records must be a title of Virarajendra. The next in line, Someshvaradeva, is known through his several inscriptions. The Gadia (20 miles from Jagdalpur) inscription of this king  records a grant of land to the same god. The record also mentions the continuation of dancing girls and is dated to  AD 1065. After 1054, the next known record is the Kuruspal inscription, dated to AD 1069. This is the second one that records his name. The record mentions that he killed Madhurantaka in battle. With this war, the five years occupation by the Cholas ended in victory for the Nagas. The Kuruspal village (22 miles from Jagdalpur) inscription mentions the grant given to the village by Someshvaradeva. It is mentioned that he had a tiger crest and snake banner and acquired the sovereignty of Chakrakuta through the favour of the Goddess, Vindhyavasini. His father was Dharavarsha, whose grandson was Kanharadeva. The record states that Someshvara burnt Vengi, subjugated Bhadrapattana and Vajra and took 6 lakhs 96 villages of the Kosala country.  The Vengi and the Chakrakuta (Bastar) kings appear to have always been feuding with each other and to have burnt each other's towns when the opportunity arose. As regards to the taking of 6 lakhs of Kosala villages, there is no doubt it is an exaggeration. The Kosala referred to in the record must be taken as Mahakosala or the Chhattisgarh country. The political success of the king is apparently evident from the discovery of gold coins at Sonasari in the Bilaspur district of Madhya Pradesh. The other inscription found on the tank slab is of Dharana Mahadevi, the queen of Someshvara, and mentions the grant of land to the god, Kamesvara. The record is dated to AD 1069. Kuruspal has yielded two more inscriptions of Someshvaradeva. One of them is dated to AD 1097. This record mentions the dedication of a lamp to the god, Lokesvara, with a subscription of 11 Gadyanaka 59. Yet another inscription of his queen, dated to 1108, records the gift of a village to two temples. The younger sister's name, Masakadevi, is known from the Gadia inscription. Dantewada Masakadevi's notification stone mentions that she is the sister of Rajabhushana Maharaja, the jewel in the crown of the Chindaka Nagas. The record calls some of the corrupt tax-collecting officers traitors for having collected taxes in advance. The village people raised coins for that purpose. An inscription dated to AD 1109 mentions Mahadevi,  the wife of Someshvaradeva. It also records that king Someshvara belonged to the Nagavamsha and that his capital was Bhogavati 60. An inscription found 23 miles northwest of Jagadalpur mentions the queen's name as Ganga Mahadevi. It records the grant of the village to Lord Narayana 61.  Most historians believe that the ruler mentioned in the above inscriptions is Someshvara II.  It does not

| 59 | EI Vol-X, pp 37-38, p35 ff |
| ---: |:--- |
| 60 | EI Vol-3, P164 |
| 61 | EI Vol-IX, P162 |

seem to me to be Someshvara II; rather it is the same Someshvara who killed Madurantaka. The battle with Madurantaka may have taken place when the king was at a very young age, and thus he could have reigned for a long time. In the year AD 1158, the Kakatiya king Prola II, the feudatory of the Chalukyas of Kalyana, defeated the Nagas, as is known from his record. Henceforth, there exist very few records on the Chindaka Nagas. It is hard to know what status they held for their continuation and survival. What is known of the successors is stated in the next paragraph. The Jatanpal (a village 40 miles from Dantewada) inscription 62 dated to AD 1218, mentions a grant of land by king Narasimhadeva. The Dantewada pillar inscription 63 dated to AD 1224, also records the name of Jagdekabhushana Maharaja Narasimhadeva. There is yet another inscription belonging to the same king, which mentions the gift given in the same year. The Sunarpal (10 miles from Narayanpal) inscription 64 records the gift given by the queen of Jayasimhadeva. The inscription also mentions the dynastic crest, the tiger with a calf. The queen's name is given as Lakamhadevi and the great queen's name is known as Sasanadevi. The Temara (near Kuruspal) inscription 65 dated to AD 1324, records the immolation of a wife of an officer of king Harischandradeva. Nothing is known about the Naga dynasty thereafter. ***Chronology of the Nagas *** The chronology of the Nagas of Chakrakuta is shown in the table below, along with the inscription dates known for each ruler. **Ruler's name ** **Inscription date ** **(AD) ** Vallabharaja

| Rajamalla | 9th Century |
|:--- |:--- |
| Vankhaditya | 9th Century |
| Shankhapala | 10th Century | Vankhaditya 9 th Century Shankhapala 10 th Century Nripathibhushana Jagadekabhushana Dharavarsha 1061, 1062, 1065

Madhurantakadeva (Chola rule and  control) 1065-1069

Rajabhushana Maharaja Someshvaradeva 1065, 1069, 1097, 1108 Kanharadeva I Prola-II (Kakatiya) Jagadekabhushana Narasimhadeva 1218, 1224 Kanharadeva II Jayasimhadeva Undated Harischandradeva

*Table 1: Chronology of the Nagas * ***Coinage of the Nagas *** The older numismatic records refer to two discoveries of gold coins of the Nagas, one found at Sonasari in the Bilaspur district of Madhya Pradesh and the other found in the Dumadei Reserve Forest area, that comes under the Kodinga Police station in the Koraput district of Orissa, in 1957. Other than these two, no major hoards were known for this dynasty. The Orissa hoard is now preserved in the Orissa State Museum in Bhubaneshvar. Twenty-

| 62 | EI Vol-X, p40 |
| ---: |:--- |
| 63 | EI Vol-X, p40 |
| 64 | EI Vol-X, pp35-36 |
| 65 | EI-Vol-X p39-40 |
seven of the coins read Rajabhushana 66 and one reads Papratiganda Bhairava. A few more such coins have been discovered in the Khammam district of Andhra Pradesh, but they may be stray finds.

The next known hoard of gold coins of the Nagas, was found in 2007. It is estimated that there were about 8 coins of Rajabhushana-type. At least four of them featured in UK and USA auctions, while the remaining specimens are probably in private collections. Three of the coins are known to the author. In 2009, a hoard containing approximately 70 coins of the Vengi Chalukyas, Matsyas and Nagas, was found in Eluru, Andhra Pradesh. As mentioned earlier, only four of the coins were of the Vengi Chalukyas, one was of the Matsyas and rest of them were Naga coins. Only nine unique varieties of punch-marked gold coins are known to the author from this hoard. The majority of the coins were of Anana Singama and Rajabhushana legend types. Based on the inscriptions of the Matsyas and Nagas, these gold coins are known by the name Gadyanaka.  An interesting fact to be observed on these coins is that they are deeply struck punchmarked coins in the shape of a bowl imitating a lotus flower. In the south, these were known as Padmatanka due to their very shape. On the periphery, there are eight punches of Chalukya-style Kannada legends.  The central, larger punch shows the tiger and calf crest along with sun and moon symbols in the case of the Nagas; a boar on the Chalukya coins and a fish on the coins of the Matsyas. The legend is perhaps the title of the king who issued them. With eight peripheral punches and one central punch, the coin resembles a lotus flower, which, in turn, is a representation of goddess, Lakshmi.  Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, is seen, on most ancient coins, either with a lotus symbol or in the form of  a lotus-shaped coin or with the legend "Sri".  The details of the coins, the history of the issuer and the coinage is explained below ***The Chalukyas of Vengi ***

*Fig 3: The Varaha Lanchana * The dynasty of the Chalukyas of Vengi, also known as the Eastern Chalukyas, came originally from Kannada stock. The dynasty ruled their kingdom for about 450 years with Vengi as their capital. The rule of the Vengi Chalukyas was not straightforward and could be described in three phases. Their kingdom was located in modern-day Andhra Pradesh. Vengi, near Eluru of the Western Godavari district, was their initial capital. The capital was later moved to Rajamahendravaram (Rajamundry). Vengi is situated between the Godavari and the Krishna rivers. In the first phase of their rule, the dynasty was closely related to the Badami Chalukyas. Kubja Vishnuvardhana, with permission from his elder brother, founded this kingdom, where the Vengi Chalukya court was fundamentally a republic of Badami in terms of administration, script and culture. As time passed, local factors gained importance and it developed its own features. ***History of the Chalukyas *** The period covering most of the reigns of Vishnuvardhana I and Vishnuvardhana II (from AD 624 to 755) was totally peaceful until

66 Snigdha Tripathy, *Early and Mediaeval Coins and Currency Systems of  * *Orissa*, pp. 106-7, pl. L

the rise of the Rashtrakutas, who overthrew the Badami Chalukyas and started interfering in the political affairs of the Chalukyas of Vengi. Dhanarnava ( AD 970-973) was the last ruler of the second phase. His reign was totally chaotic due to the Rashtrakuta dominance and frequent invasion of other neighbours. With the murder of Dhanarnava by the Jata Choda king of Telugu Choda, the Vengi kingdom was lost to the Cholas for the next 25 years.  In the third phase, with the help of the Cholas, Saktivarman I and Vimaladitya, the Chalukya rulers, restored the kingdom. It was virtually an alliance with the Cholas and the dynasty came to be known as the Chalukya-Chola. The prince of the Vengi Chalukyas, Rajendra II, occupied the Chola throne in AD 1070 under the name of Kulottunga I. Nevertheless, Vijayaditya VII, the cousin of Rajaraja, continued to rule over Vengi till his death in 1076 when the Vengi Chalukya dynasty came to an end. The last ruler, Rajendra, united with the Cholas, ruled until AD 1118. ***Chronology of the Chalukyas *** Shown below are the rulers in each of the phases of the dynasty. **First phase ** **AD ** **624 - 755 ** Kubja Vishnuvardhana 624 - 641 Jayasimha I 641 - 673 Indra Bhattaraka Vishnuvardhana II 673 - 682 Mangi Yuvaraja 682 - 706 Jayasimha II 706 - 708 Vishnuvardhana II 719 - 755 **Second phase ** **AD ** **755-973** Vijayaditya I 755 - 772 Vishnuvardhana IV 772 - 708 Vijayaditya II 808 - 847 Vishnuvardhana V 847 - 849 Gunaga Vijayaditya III 849 - 892 Chalukya Bhima I 892 - 921 Vijayaditya IV Taila I Vikramaditya II 927 - 928 Yuddhamalla II 928 - 935 Amma I 921 - 927 Bhima II 935 - 947 Ammaraja 947 - 970 Dhanar Nava 970 - 973 **Third phase ** **AD ** **999-1069-1118  ** Saktivarman I 1000 - 1011 Vimaladitya 1011 - 1018 Rajaraja Narendra 1019 - 1061 Saktivarman II Vijayaditya VII 1063 - 1076 67 Rajendra II (Kulottunga) 1070 - 1118

*Table 2: Chronology of the Vengi Chalukyas * *** *** *** *** 67 The last six years of his reign as regent for Prince Rajendra II --- --- --- --- --- **Coins of Padam Singh. **

*Below is a copy of the illustration of the earliest reported coin of * *Ratlam, a 'half falus' (6.2g. approx) taken from Dr Bhatt's book.  * *Date: 1192 / (24?) *

*Bhatt 1 (copied from Dr Bhatt's plate, with thanks.) *

*KM. 1 with mint name 'Ratlam.'  These coins usually have regnal * *years of Shah 'Alam II in the 20s and up to 34 (1778 - 1791) * *which places them in the reign of Padam Singh. (1773 - 1800) * *Wt. 13.7g.  17 mm. dia. Bhatt 10 and others. *

*This one has a hexagonal cartouche and a symbol added to the * *obverse between 'falu' and 's' - again a fern-like frond. * *The regnal year is probably 30.  Wt. 13.0g.  18 mm dia. * *Similar to Bhatt plate III coin H. *

*Similar type, but with a square cartouche without ra'ij' * *RY is 28.  Wt 13.1g.  18 - 19 mm. dia. -- * *Similar to Bhatt plate III coin A. * Similar coins with hexagonal and square cartouches (see 3 rd and 4 th coins in table above) are dated from RY 20 of Shah 'Alam II. Hijra dates have not been noted. In later coins of Padam Singh, and especially during the next two reigns, the fern-like frond gives way to a progressively wider variety of symbols.  The table below shows two of a limited number that are found on coins of Padam Singh, and on some *kachcha * examples.  The 'fern-like frond' is used again in the centre part of the first design shown, which occurs in a number of distinct but essentially similar (die?) varieties.  This example appears to be retrograde, as the frond is the reverse way round from those shown on the above coins.  However, without any legends to assist, retrograde dies cannot always be positively identified.  The second example has a very similar scimitar to those found on some coins from the Sindhia mint at Ujjain and a

few from Holkar's mint at Indore.  It is also found on scarce, essentially identical coins of approximately half paisa weight, around 5.9 g, like the lower coin in the table *.* The hexagonal and square cartouches seem to have disappeared from the coinage before or at the end of Padam Singh's reign, but a complete date list has not been attempted for either, as examples with both digits of the regnal year are scarce. For this reason, most coins of this type are offered on the market as 'RY2' and 'RY3'.  They are actually RY 2x and 3x, probably all between RY 24 and 38. **Two other symbols found on Padam Sigh's coins. **

*Top:  Bhatt 54 and 59 obverses. * *Bottom:  Bhatt 59 half paisa.  Dr Bhatt attributes this coin to * *Pratapgarh, but this appears to be an error. * Coins of Krause type KM5 have the mint name at the bottom of the reverse, but dates do not appear to have been recorded. Specimens of this type were sought during this study, but none were seen, so no further comment is possible. The multiplication of symbols on Ratlam coins continues into the next two reigns. **A digression concerning ** ***ra'ij*** ** countermarks. ** 'Lion facing left,' 'lion and leopard' and 'lion and leaf / palm frond' coins come in a bewildering number of varieties with several different legends and pseudo-legends that are clearly the products of more than one mint, struck over a protracted period. The original 'lion paisa' coins are scarce issues of Mehidpur (Holkar) mint, but they are vastly outnumbered by obvious copies and imitations, very often with bungled (frequently retrograde) legends, mostly without mint names, and often underweight. Clearly the majority are *'kachcha' * pice.  A few have crudely engraved mint names, some of which have been read as 'Deogarh' and 'Deogarh **?** ' by Dr Bhatt.  If that reading proves to be correct, the coins so read may be Pratapgarh state coins, as Dr Bhatt suggests, but a number of authorities have expressed strong doubts about that attribution.  It is not immediately obvious where such coins would fit into the Pratapgarh corpus, but only time and more research will clarify this point. **'Lion copper,' counterstruck ** ***ra'ij*** **.** * *
Some of the lion coppers, like the one pictured above, are found with a *ra'ij* countermark *,* identical to those applied at Ratlam, but they could have been stamped onto the flan anywhere in the area. The origin and age of the host coins is not knowable unless the type is clear or the mint name and / or date can be read - which they usually cannot.  Many other countermarks are found on a wide variety of coins in the area, most of which have not been attributed to any particular polity, but a number have been tentatively attributed to Tonk State.  Only round *ra'ij* stamps are known with certainty to have been applied by the Ratlam state, but probably not by Ratlam alone. The coin shown here has a *ra'ij* countermark of the Ratlam type on an unattributable *kachcha* 'lion facing left' paisa, itself struck over a Banswara paisa.  Some of the legend of the original Banswara coin is visible on one side, while the lion is fairly distinct on the side with the countermark. The other side has additionally been stamped with a countermark die bearing what looks like a Roman capital 'P' whose significance and origin are unknown, but it was obviously applied before the *ra'ij*.  A similar stamp is visible on Bhatt plate III P.  The Banswara host coin type has been attributed to Lakshman Singh, whose reign began in AD 1844 and the Mehidpur 'lion and leaf or leopard' coins, from which the second-struck die was copied, date from even later than that. The *ra'ij* countermarks identified by Dr Bhatt as having been applied in Ratlam obviously pre-dated the coins with *ra'ij* in cartouche as part of the die, which were a direct replacement for them.  The earliest coins with round *ra'ij* cartouches appear to have been introduced in or about RY 24 of Shah 'Alam II, which began in March, 1782. It is, therefore, certain that identical marks were placed on coins, including *kachcha * pice, over a long period of time, because the coin illustrated cannot be one of the early countermarked coins of Ratlam described by Dr Bhatt.  As we have repeatedly been reminded, not everything is as it seems. **Coins of Parbat Singh, ** **AD ** **1800 to 1824, ** **AH** ** 1214/15 to 1239/40, **

**MFE** ** 1209/10 to 1233/34). ** The dates AD 1800 to 1824 are equivalent to the period between regnal year 43 of Shah 'Alam II and year 20 of Muhammad Akbar II ( AH 1215/16 to 1239/40).  The coins listed and illustrated here appear to be Ratlam coins, and are dated during Parbat Singh's reign, but as they do not show recognisable parts of the mintname 'Ratlam', a number of students have rightly stated that a firm attribution to Ratlam state cannot be fully substantiated.  Others would tentatively support such an attribution, pending discovery of evidence to the contrary. ***Series 1 - Paisas with Persian Shah 'Alam II legends and regnal *** ***years in the 50s (the only regnal year read so far is 59). *** Assuming the regnal years to be true dates, all coins with Shah 'Alam II legends and posthumous regnal years in the 50s were struck during this reign.  Dr Bhatt illustrates a coin of this type on which the year is 59 is readable (just), and attributes it to Ratlam state.  No other fully readable regnal years in the 50s are known to me, but may well exist.  Some have a dot to the right of the '5' but unless the part of the die to the right of the dot can also be seen, we cannot be certain whether the dot is meant as a Persian'0' or is merely decorative. We have seen that a start was made to the addition of symbols to the obverse of the Ratlam paisas during the previous reign. First the fern-like frond was added, which is seen on coins with all three shapes of cartouche, and then came the scimitar, found only on coins with round cartouches.  Neither of these designs survived into Parbat Singh's reign and neither did hexagonal or square cartouches. The first new symbols of this reign include a floral symbol that is found in a number of varieties (often referred to as a lily), one that incorporates an Indore-type sun-face symbol, and a battle-axe: all three are illustrated below.  The legends and the regnal year on these coins are engraved in good Persian script, but only small

parts of them ever appear on the flans, most of which are taken up by the symbols and cartouches.  No dates have been seen. It is probably reasonable to regard the *ra'ij * in cartouche as the Ratlam mint mark.  However, its presence on many essentially similar *kachcha * coins makes it perhaps a somewhat unreliable one **Series 1. - Early Coins of Parbat Singh. **

*Not unlike Padam Singh's coins, but with somewhat degraded * *legends and different symbols.  The first is sometimes described as * *a lily, the second is a sunface copied from Indore coins and the * *third is a battleaxe.  The regnal year is often (perhaps always) * *posthumous RY 59 of  Shah 'Alam II (* *AD * *1816, * *AH* *.1231). * *Wt.  13.9 and 11.2g.  19 - 20 and 18mm. dia.  Bhatt 56 and 58 * *(second coin photo kindly provided by Amit Mehta, Ahmadabad) * ***Series 2 - Broad flan paisas without readable legends, with *** ***artistic designs consisting largely of symbols and images, and *** ***MFE*** *** or Hijra dates in Nagari numerals. *** Parbat Singh's second series are of a completely new design and these also cannot be proven to be Ratlam coins.  The legends are so mangled as to be merely geometric and decorative patterns and are combined with images mainly taken from nature, with very little that can be described as Persian script.  A few scraps, probably intended to imitate legends (there is what might represent a Persian ' *as* ' or a retrograde ' *sa* ' at about 10 o'clock on the obverse of the middle coin in the table) often appear to be retrograde or upside-down. The lack of Persian legends should not surprise us.  Few people in Malwa would have been capable of reading, or even recognising Persian script.  Not many more, especially among the poor, uneducated users of copper coins, would even have been capable of reading vernacular languages.  Those used to handling, counting and changing money would, of course, be fully numerate, and would certainly have understood figures and dates, and dates are the only parts of the legends that remain both accurately engraved and fully readable.  The figures are Nagari, not Persian. ** ** We have seen that the first coins of Parbat Singh's reign were a continuation of the regular Mughal types of his predecessor, Padam Singh.  However, now that the Marathas, mortal enemies of the Mughals, were in the ascendancy in Malwa, any possibility of appeasing them might be of value to a small state with a tiny military capability, and this may have included the striking of more recognisably 'Indian' coins.  This 'Indianisation' of the coinage is seen on the output from many other mints of similar vintage.
Known Series 2 coins have dates between 1219 and 1233.  Dr Bhatt interpreted the dates as Hijra, but these coins may be dated in the Malwi Fasli Era, as this is a wholly agricultural area, and it has already been noted (see first part of this piece) that Fasli Eras, using solar calendars, were introduced to make life a little easier for agricultural communities and their rulers.  If they are Hijra dates, they are equivalent to AD 1804 to 1818, and if they are Malwi Fasli dates, they equate to AD 1811 to 1824 or 25.  In either case, the known dates probably all fall within the reign of Parbat Singh (1800 to 1824). The only clearly illustrated and dated example of these broadflan coins in Dr Bhatt's book is number 36 on Plate VI, which appears to be the same as the middle coin shown here, and incidentally bears the same date.  The *ra'ij* cartouche, when it can be seen on these coins, is somewhat degenerate.  Regnal years have not been seen but if they are on the dies, they would probably be found to the right of the cartouche.  It is not there on the bottom coin, so regnal years are probably absent from this series.  No mint name is readable on any of the coins illustrated, and since all pseudo-script appears very degenerate, any claimed readings should, perhaps, be viewed with healthy suspicion. **Broad flan coins of Parbat Singh. - Series 2 **

*Top coin is dated Malwi Fasli Era (?) 1219, the second coin * *(Bhatt 56) is dated 1232 and the bottom coin, 1233 (1811, 1824 * *and 1825). * *Wts 9.0, 12.5 and  13.2 g. Dias: 25 -27,. 28 and 31 - 34 mm. dia.* The design - especially of the top coin - is artistic, and all three are engraved in tolerably fine style.  It seems unlikely that makers of *kachcha * pice would be prepared to go to the trouble and expense of preparing the kind of dies used here, or such broad, thin flans, and even add a readable date, so these coins appear almost certainly to be 'official' coins of the Ratlam durbar mint, struck for Parbat Singh.. The weight difference - a gain(!) of about 40%) - may be considered rather excessive for *pukkah* coins struck only 13 years apart at the same mint, and while weights generally were on the decrease.  On the other hand, if ALL coins of this mint in this reign are to be considered as *kachcha * pice *,* as some numismatists believe, disparate weights would not be an important issue.  The suggestion that they represent different denominations seems hardly credible.

**Balwant Singh, ** **AD ** **1824 to 29 Aug. 1857;  ** **AH** ** 1239/40 - 1274; ** **MFE** ** 1233 / 34 to 1266/67 **

Similar 'caveats' apply to attempts to attribute coins to this reign as to the previous one, only more so.  Some coins are clearly dated and are certainly attributable to the period of Balwant Singh's reign, but again, the lack of a mint name precludes us from unequivocally declaring them to be 'certainly from Ratlam,' or 'certainly *pukkah*.'  Because of a lack of any dating evidence whatsoever, this uncertainty is greater in the case of later series. As long as we can be permitted to regard the *'ra'ij* in cartouche' as the mint mark of Ratlam State, matters appear a little clearer than would otherwise be the case. The preponderance of finds of all these types in the Ratlam and Sailana areas tends to indicate a local origin, and 'family resemblances' - especially the degenerate *ra'ij* in cartouche and the pseudo-legends of later series - support their attribution to Ratlam as a group. Proliferation of symbols is taken much further in this reign, but 'family resemblances' between coins allocated to all series remain very strong.  All coins still bear a cartouche, but the *ra'ij * is even more degraded, and the dots round their edges are becoming larger and fewer, giving them a cruder appearance. ***Series 1.  Narrower flans, *** ***MFE*** *** or Hijra dates with Nagari *** ***numerals, trefoil symbol in loop of a Persian 'S' ***

These coins are as scarce as we would expect from the mint of a small state.  Narrower, thicker flans are the rule for this reign, though there is considerable variation. From appearance alone, the first series could belong to this reign or the previous one, although it 'fits' better in this.  The second coin (dated 1234) would belong to Parbat Singh if the date is Hijra ( AH 1234 is AD 1818/19) and perhaps Balwant Singh if it is MFE ( MFE 1234 is AD 1824/25).  If they do indeed belong to Balwant Singh's reign, the date would have to be MFE, or perhaps an error.  It is also possible, of course, that this coin continued to be struck a little past the end of Parbat Singh's reign. All three coins considered here bear a trefoil symbol exactly similar to that on the Indore ('Uncertain mint') half anna dated AH 1228 ( AD 1813) given number KM.91 in the Krause catalogues. Indeed, it could have been copied from that type, which predates this type by several years. **Coins of Balwant Singh - series 1.**

Because it is usually impossible to be certain if the very narrow flan coins (top illustration) were struck from dated dies, it is only possible to firmly attribute these coins to the correct reign and series if the date, or part of the date can be seen on a coin of the same type, but struck on a broader flan.
In this case, the middle illustration shows a dated coin of the same type.  The date is MFE or AH 1234 in exergue.  The top coin has a very dumpy flan, which would be sufficient to explain why a date in that position on the die, has fallen off the flan.  Both coins have the trefoil symbol lying within the loop of a Persian 'S' and with a Gujarati or Nagari numeral '5' to the top left, on the obverse.  To the right of the Nagari or Gujarati '5' the top portion of the loop of the 'S' appears to have been changed into a Nagari '1' in some specimens, making it '51' but this is not always clear. There is no mint name present. The lowest coin in the table is essentially similar to the top two, but the '5' does not appear on this coin.  More importantly, neither does the loop of the 'S'.  Unfortunately, there is no date visible on this example so, although it is intermediate in some ways between the top two coins and those of series 2 below, it cannot be proved, and should not be presumed to be intermediate date-wise between the two series.  But it might be.  The reverse of all three coins has a degenerate *ra'ij* in cartouche and the legends are now merely a series of neatly executed but meaningless curved lines, apparently identical on these three coins, and on the series that follow. ***Series 2.  Loop of Persian 'S' no longer present, Gujarati '35' *** ***instead of '5' to left of symbol ***

In coins of series 2, the Persian 'S' around the symbol has gone, like the last coin tentatively placed in series 1 above. Mint names are not present on the Series 2 coins illustrated. For this reason, attribution of these coins to Balwant Singh's reign must again be regarded as tentative, but is strengthened by the probability that the mint was inoperative for the whole of his successor's reign  -  and their attribution to Ratlam because of their very close resemblance to other coins already so attributed. ** ** These are rarely found in better than 'very good' and 'fine' condition, and so were probably either weakly struck, or muchcirculated.  From the history of the state during that reign (at least up to AD 1819-21) evidence of a lack of attention to minting procedures and quality of output are not at all unexpected. **Coins of Balwant Singh - Series 2. **

*Bhatt 100 (lower coin) Upper coin is similar, but the jhar * *is differently engraved. * *Wt. 12.3 and 10.9g.  23.0 and 21.0 mm. diameter * The first coin is dated AH or MFE 1235 ( AD 1825/26 or 1819 /20) and the date of the other is off the flan.  The symbol is a kind of jhar, differently shaped on each.  The '5' is clearly seen to be part of '35' on these coins, but because the area of the coin to the left of the '5' is not usually visible in coins of series 1, we do not yet know if that would be true for those coins as well.  If the dies could be examined, much that is now doubtful would become straightforward.  In this case, the '35' agrees with the date on the coin - 1235, but that must be a coincidence, because on similar

coins in Dr Bhatt's book, such as Bhatt 81 and 79, the date and this number do not agree. They are struck on moderately broad flans.  The *ra'ij* is now so degraded as to resemble a Gujarati '9' turned 90 degrees to the left.  The 'legends' are again represented by a series of curves, which are, to all intents and purposes, identical in shape and layout with those on series three coins below, on which they can be more clearly seen, and series 1 coins, where they are less clearly seen. This is part of what I referred to as 'family likeness' above. ** ** ***Series 3.  Dated in Nagari characters in the 1240s, but most *** ***flans too narrow to show the date ***

Series 3 has been divided into two sub-series, designated 3a and 3b, which differ in ways that might or might not prove to be significant - again, sight of more specimens will, we can hope, clarify matters so that relationships between the sub-series (if such they are) can be studied in more detail. ** ** ***Sub-Series 3a*** * *

The factor that places these three coins together in the first place is the main symbol - identical on all three. The dies from which these coins were struck are probably all dated, but most of the flans are narrow and show little or no part of the date.  The diameter varies from under 17 mm to nearly 23 mm. and they weigh mostly between 10 and 12 grams, for those handled in this study.  The sub-series 3b coins weigh and measure roughly the same.  Lightweight ones probably include *kachcha * *pice* copied from sub-series 3a *pukkah* coins. **Sub-series 3a paisas ** **Fully dated and undated coins of Balwant Singh. ** *1, 2 and 3. Spear and flower. Bhatt 88 and sim. * *Bottom coin has a spear to the left of the flower. *

*Bhatt 88. Dates 1244, (1)244 and (12)44 * *Max dia. 18.0, 18.0 and 22.0 mm.   Wts 9.5, 9.6 and 9.5 g. * Even on some of the coins with narrow flans, a portion of the date, such as '24' and '124' is often visible, which must be part of '124x.'  Dr Bhatt shows similar coins with dates in the 1240s, the latest of which is 1245, and no date later than that was found on any coin of this series during this study. MFE 1245 is 1835/36, and AH 1245 is equivalent to AD 1829 /30 - all known reported coins of this series are therefore dated within the reign of Balwant Singh, whichever dating system was used.  However, if the coins are dated in the MFE, Dr Bhatt's date for the first closure of the Ratlam
| 1244. | What appears to be a Nagari '2' (looking more like a |
|:--- |:--- |
| Persian 2 tilted 20 degrees to the left on sub-series 3a coins) is |  |
| found to the right of the symbol on the same side of all series 3 |  |
| coins. | This could be the remnant of the first digit of regnal years |

Coins of Series 3b may or may not have identical layouts to those of Sub-series 3a.  No dates have been seen on them, and dates are also absent from similar coins illustrated in Dr Bhatt's books and articles

**A range of types of Sub-series 3b coins ** *1. Ferny frond and katar, Bhatt 121.  2. 7-petalled flower, * *Bhatt 45 under Dhar state. 3. Horse. Bhatt 96.  4. Cup. * *Bhatt 91.  5. Leaf and dagger. Not in Dr Bhatt's book.  6. * *Sword and trishul. Bhatt 134 sim.  7. Jhar. Bhatt 133 sim. * *W'ts: 9.6, 8.1, 11.55., 10.1, 9.3, 10.2 and 12.8 grams.* Possibly there are no dates on the dies from which any of them were struck, and if this proves to be the case, that fact would place them in a separate type or variety from those of Sub-series 3a. Since all other parts of the design are pretty-well identical to those on the coins shown as Sub-series 3a above, this would not be a safe assumption to make at this stage. On the obverse, these coins have a wide range of symbols, many of which also occur on examples of several other series of Indian coins of a similar vintage from a number of mints, some local.  The plagiaristic character of the average *kachcha pice* of the Malwa mints, already discussed, encourages the view that these coins may all be of that class.  However, the presence of meaningful dates, if later research shows them to be present, and generally careful engraving of dies do not.  Neither does the very close agreement of the greater parts of the design of these coins, both among themselves and to that on the dated coins of Series 3a above.  This includes the identical curves and the Gujarati '2' that form the pseudo-legends. Overall, the designs are far less random or crude than those usually seen on *kachcha pice.* The 'legends' (pseudo-legends) are again represented by curved lines (almost identical for all coins of this series) that cannot reasonably be interpreted as attempts to represent proper Persian words or letters.  Again, no mint names are present. Possibly none of them are *kachcha pice,* but official Ratlam coins produced during a period when strong commercial pressures were in force, pushing standards and costs in all coin-producing workshops as low as possible. The weights remain reasonably constant for these coins, again suggesting that they are 'standard' or *pukkah * coins ***Series 4.  Similar to series 3, but with redesigned obverse ***

*These two coins weigh 12.3 and 12.9 grams and have * *diameters of 17.0 and 18.0 mm.  The * ra'ij * and cartouche * *are degraded but the dies were neatly engraved. * The overall appearance of coins of Series 4 is of a tidier, simplified layout, more carefully engraved designs and again without any dates. However, the Nagari '2' to the right of the
symbol has not disappeared (it has been seen on a similar coin in the possession of Amit Mehta of Ahmedabad) and there are other detail differences.  Dr Bhatt does not appear to have recorded these coins.  The symbols noted so far are a comb, a highly decorative six-petalled flower, and another, similar flower without the dots in and between the petals. It is, of course, speculation to attribute these coins as the last series of this reign, because they bear, or appear to bear no dating information whatsoever.  This speculative attribution is based on the perceived notion that the 'evolution' of the Ratlam paisa over time, after the Mughal types ceased to be struck, appears to be gravitating towards simplification of design, and the removal of  dates and script. Once again the 'family resemblance' of these coins to the other series is called to bear witness. The pseudo-legends seen on these coins almost exactly match those on the previous two series, suggesting that, like them, they are 'official' Ratlam coins and the weights tend to confirm this assumption.

**Bhairon Singh (Bhairon Singh):  1857 to 1864. **

No Ratlam coins have been reported with dates in the reign of Bhairon Singh (1857 to 1864).  If they exist, they will be dated between MFE 1267 and 1274 or AH 1273 to 1281, or possibly equivalent dates in the Vikrama Samvat ( VS ) Era. The mint was reportedly closed (date probably 1830 or 1835 or soon thereafter - see above) and was not re-opened in 1845 despite attempts to have this done. It was later re-opened for the striking of Ranjit Singh's coins from 1864 onwards. By that time, the production of *kachcha pice* had reached its maximum extent and was declining rapidly in Malwa.  No *kachcha * versions of Ranjit Singh's coins have been noticed. *** *** ***Kachcha pice*** ** based on Ratlam ** ***ra'ij*** ** coins. **

As a rule of thumb, copper coins of Malwa of standard weight and with legible dates and / or mint names usually have most other parts of the legend engraved properly.  Such coins are overwhelmingly likely to be standard or *pukkah* pice.  Crudely made, often lightweight coins and those with engraving errors are most often *kachcha pice.*  ' *Ra'ij* in cartouche' coins of both classes are found in large numbers, even though Ratlam was a small state. ** ** *A * kachcha pice *, based on the Ratlam ra'ij coppers.*

*Copy of Bhatt 45, 62 or 63.  Weight 9.6 grams. * *Note especially the 'mint name' * The coin above, weighing only 9.6g. was struck from reasonably well engraved dies, and has readable legends and a neatly engraved symbol, probably copied from Bhatt 45, 62 or 63. However, the mint name has been rendered as one curved line and some vertical strokes.  It is an attractive, well-made coin, but is certainly a *kachcha pice* from an unknown mint, possibly in Ratlam state, and probably made quite early in the process of ' *kachcha-* isation.' **General comments **

Coins of the reign of Padam Singh and the first part of that of Parbat Singh are basically of standard Mughal pattern, except for the addition of symbols.  They all appear to have been struck in the name of the Mughal Emperor, Shah 'Alam II, and earlier examples certainly bear the mint name 'Ratlam.' Aside from the cartouche, these coins have a normal Mughal-style reverse with the regnal year, and the dates were placed on the obverse.

However, on the later coins of Parbat Singh, and all the known coins of Balwant Singh, the date, when present, has moved to the cartouche side, in exergue.  There is only one visible digit - a Nagari '2' - that may be part of the regnal year.  The *'ra'ij',* where it can be seen clearly, has become degenerate. The terms 'obverse' and 'reverse' have little meaning in relation to these later series. On most flans, only small parts of the legends are visible, and they are incomplete and unreadable. The coins of Parbat Singh and the early coins of Balwant Singh appear usually to be dated, and the engraving of the dies is reasonably clear and of good quality.  The fabric of the coins of both reigns is of acceptably fine style, and most can reasonably be described as aesthetically pleasing.  The later, narrower flan coins of Balwant Singh have attractive, well-engraved symbols, but the visible bits of the pseudo-legends appear not to be as complex as those on Parbat Singh's coins.  All or most of the latter series are without dates, readable legends and mint names. The British records (above cited) state that, before its closure, the mint at Ratlam had been a prolific producer of *kachcha pice*. They included copies and imitations of coins of many states in Malwa, Rajasthan and Gujarat.  The records make no distinction between the mint (or mints) making *kachcha pice* and that (or those) making *pukkah pice* at Ratlam.  This implied connection suggests, but does not prove that the coins were all struck at the same mint complex.  From their appearance and weights, the Ratlam corpus, taken as a whole, could reasonably be interpreted as including coins of both 'standard' and 'false,' *pukkah * and *kachcha* character, and becoming more *kachcha * with the passing years, and this coincides with 'Theory 1' of the first part of this article (JONS 205). There is also a connection between the *kachcha pice* ('false coin') mints of Ratlam and the later ones at Sailana, as reported in the same British records.  Both mints (or groups of mints) apparently struck both *pukkah * and *kachcha pice*, even if the two classes of coin were not produced in the same buildings and by the same establishments.  Accidental swapping and mixing of the dies could have occurred, and firm evidence of this would cast more light on the operation of these shadowy places.  It is entirely likely that *kachcha pice* based on the standard Ratlam *ra'ij* coins, were made later at Sailana, after the closure of the Ratlam facilities, as those coins reportedly remained in circulation in large numbers in rural areas until near the end of the 19 th century. We are on safe ground in attributing coins to Ratlam and to a particular ruler only when we can see the mintname and dates that confirm our attribution. We are clearly not in that position with regard to most of the series described above. **Attribution of some ** ***ra'ij *** **in cartouche coppers to Pratapgarh ** **state **

Dr Bhatt attributes his numbers 45, 51, 56, 58, 59 and 63 to Pratapgarh because he has read the mint name as 'Deogarh' on them, and a number of others because he read the mint name as doubtful 'Deogarh **?** '  However, it now appears that in the opinion of most people working with *'ra'ij * in cartouche' coins today, none show remnants of the mint name 'Deogarh.' and on coins like numbers 45, 59 and 63 in particular, the mintname could more easily be restored as 'Ratlam'.  For the purposes of this study, they are all retained in the Ratlam corpus, because that is where they seem to fit best.  The attribution of any of the *'ra'ij* in cartouche' coins to Pratapgarh state therefore appears very doubtful, and recent attempts to attribute some of them to Banswara are even more suspect. It appears reasonable to regard the *ra'ij* in cartouche in all its forms as the mint mark of Ratlam, and probably the only nonRatlam coin with that mark will be found to be *kachcha* coins, which may or may not have been struck at the unofficial *kachcha * *pice* mint(s) in Ratlam state, discussed above.
On the Khalsa coins of year 3, according to Surinder Singh, the couplet on the obverse has remained the same except that " *singh* " has been added to " *gobind* ". However, as he himself admitted that he could not get access to the other coin of year 3 from the collection of Mrs Norma J. Puddester, he may have missed seeing the part of " *g* ū *(r)* " which can be seen in the illustration in the second edition of Mr Herrli's book "Coins of the Sikhs". In the course of compiling this article, I have also had the privilege of receiving the images of the actual coins of years 2 and 3 from S. Saran Singh. It is clear from the image of the actual rupee of year 3 that " *g* ū *r(* ū *)* " has, indeed, been added to " *gobind* " in addition to " *singh* " and the couplet is apparently as follows:

## ﺳﯾﮐہ زد ﺑﺮ ﮨﺮ دو ﻋﺎﻟم

ﻓﺿل ﺳﭼﺎ ﺻﺎﺣب اﺳت ﻓﺗﻊ ﮔورﮔوﺑﻧدﺳﻧﮔہ ﺷﺎه ﺷﺎ ﮨن ﺗﯾﻎ ﻧﺎﻧک وﺣب اﺳت

*sikka zad bar har do '* ā *lam, fa* ẓ *l sachch* ā * * ṣāḥ *ib ast, * *fate* ḥ * g* ū *r(* ū *) gobind singh sh* ā *h sh* ā *h* ā *n, tegh-é-n* ā *nak w* āḥ *ib ast * * * In his book, Herrli translated the couplet as: ** ** *Coin struck through both the worlds by the grace of the true Lord. * *Victory of Guru Gobind Singh, King of Kings, N* ā *nak's sword is * *the provider. * * * In his article in the JONS 202, he made a slight amendment to the meaning of the couplet as follows:

*Coin Struck for each of the two Worlds by the grace of the True * *Lord, * *Of the Conquest won by Guru Gobind's Sword, King Nanak is the * *Provider.  * * * On the other hand, the translation provided by Surinder Singh in his book "Sikh Coins: Symbol of Sovereignty" is:

*The coin has been struck in both the worlds herein and after. With * *the guarantee of Guru N* ā *nak's double-edged sword or guaranteed * *by Guru N* ā *nak under the strength of his sword. The victory of * *Guru Gobind Singh, King of Kings, has been achieved with the * *grace of Sachch* ā * S* ā *hib, the God Almighty. *

The term " *do '* ā *lam* " means two worlds. The idea of "two worlds", which has extensively been discussed in the past, refers to the "the spiritual and secular worlds". This idea of the two worlds has always been acceptable to the Sikh ethos. However, the meaning of " *zad bar har do '* ā *lam* " as "Struck in both the worlds herein and after" as rendered by Surinder Singh would sound as though the same coin were struck at two places (herein and after) simultaneously. Possibly, Surinder Singh has philosophical or religious reasons for this, but no matter how philosophical the idea could be, the meaning does not appear to come out properly. Hans Herrli who previously gave the meaning of the same words as "struck through both the worlds" has improved upon his interpretation of the same in his JONS 202 article as "struck for each of the two worlds". This would imply that the coin was struck for "the secular world" (i.e. for commercial purpose) as well as for "the spiritual world" (i.e., for offering in Gurdwaras etc. and for religious purposes). This would fit well with the Sikh ethos. The " *fa* ẓ *l sachch* ā * * ṣāḥ *ib ast* " part of the couplet, which is shown to mean "By the grace of the Almighty", has been associated differently in the above two translations. Whereas in the translations provided by Hans Herrli the attribution of the " *minting * *of the coin* " is by the grace of the Almighty ( *sachch* ā * * ṣāḥ *ib* ), in the translation provided by Surinder Singh, the " *achievement of *

*victory of Guru Gobind Singh* " has been shown to be by the grace of the Almighty ( *sachch* ā * * ṣāḥ *ib* ). In effect, the meaning of " *fa* ẓ *l * *sachch* ā * * ṣāḥ *ib ast* " remains the same in both the translations. However, when it comes to the second line, Guru Nanak, the first Guru of the Sikhs and the founder of the Sikh religion, is not known to have ever wielded a sword. Could it be possible that the word " *tegh* " (a double-edged sword) is associated with Guru Gobind and the second line of the couplet in fact should be read as " *fate* ḥ * tegh-i g* ū *r* ū * gobind singh* "? Without distorting the meaning of any part of the couplet, it would then mean "Victory of the double-edged sword of Guru Gobind Singh, King of Kings" etc. This would then fit well with the spirit of the warrior Guru, who infused the fighting quality within the Khalsa to oppose all kind of oppression. It is a well-known fact that the die makers took some liberty in arranging the legends on the coins according to their convenience and to suit the décor of the coin. Hence, there is a possibility that the couplet might have been misread on account of its arrangement. In my opinion, the couplet should read: ﺳﯾﮐہ زد ﺑﺮ ﮨ ﺮ دو ﻋﺎﻟم ﻓﺿل ﺳﭼﺎ ﺻﺎﺣب اﺳت ﻓﺗﻊ ﺗﯾﻎ ﮔورﮔوﺑﻧدﺳﻧﮔہ ﺷﺎه ﺷﺎﮨن  ﻧﺎﻧک وﺣب اﺳت

*sikka zad bar har do '* ā *lam, fa* ẓ *l sachch* ā * * ṣāḥ *ib ast, * *fate* ḥ * tegh-é-g* ū *r(* ū *) gobind singh sh* ā *h sh* ā *h* ā *n, n* ā *nak w* āḥ *ib ast *

The opinion offered by me finds strength in the fact that on almost all the "Nanakshahi" coins of Amritsar mint, " *fate* ḥ " and "te *g* h" appear in the same order as depicted above by me. Hans Herrli also depicted the couplet in the same manner in his article in JONS 202.  Moreover, since Guru N ā nak never claimed divinity and attributed all occurrences to Almighty God, and all through the religious hymns in the Guru Granth S ā hib, the holy book of the Sikhs treated as the embodiment of the Almighty, wherever an occurrence associated with the word N ā nak has appeared, N ā nak has attributed the occurrence to God Almighty. For example, " *n* ā *nak tera * ā *sra* " does not mean "O N ā nak, we are at your mercy" but means, "N ā nak submits:  Almighty, we are at your mercy". Similarly, " *n* ā *nak n* ā *m jah* ā *z hai, charhe so utare p* ā *r* " does not mean "(constant recitation of) N ā nak's name is the vessel that ferries us to salvation". In fact it means, "N ā nak states that (the constant recitation of) HIS name (the name of the Almighty - Sachch ā S ā hib) is the vessel that ferries us to salvation". As such, in my opinion, " *n* ā *nak w* āḥ *ib ast* " should actually mean "N ā nak states that the Almighty is the Provider". Beyond this, I leave it to the judgment of those more learned than me. Hence, the couplet, in my opinion, should actually mean:

*Coin struck for the two worlds by the grace of the true Lord. * *Victory of the double-edged sword of the King of Kings Guru * *Gobind Singh,  * *N* ā *nak submits that the Almighty is the provider. *

Hans Herrli, in his article "The rupees of Band ā Bah ā dur: A Comedy of Errors", on page 39 of JONS 202, correctly attributed the sword ( *tegh-é* ) to Guru Gobind. However, being unaware of the characteristics of the religious ethos of the Sikhs, he still translated it as "Nanak is the provider". To recapitulate, the above couplet has been termed the "Nanakshahi" couplet and the same couplet with minor variations was used on the obverse of the coins of the Sikhs that have been categorised as "Nanakshahi" coins. ** **
## THE 'NUO SHREE SICCA' - A MARATHA **RUPEE ** By ** ** Shailendra Bhandare

** ** A memorandum by John Clunes, submitted on 14 August 1829, on coins current in the city of Pune and its vicinity, was published verbatim in 'Indian Numismatic Chronicle', in its combined issue of vol. III part II and vol. IV, part I, 1964-65 (ed. S V Sohoni, published by the Bihar Research Society, Patna) with the following note added at its beginning by P L Gupta: "This article is a reproduction of a memorandum submitted in a printed form to the East India Company... by the author who was probably some employee of the Company at Poona. A copy of this memorandum is now available in the India Office Library, where it is bound in volume 48 of the tracts. Dr P M Joshi drew my attention to this tract and I obtained a photo-stat copy of it during my visit to London in 1962. This tract contains valuable information about the Maratha coins that were current at Poona in the early nineteenth century. The title given to the memorandum by the author runs into several lines as - List of Rupees most current in Poona, with relative value of each percentum at this date, to the Poona Halli Sicca or Standard Rupee of Account among the Sahookars; shewing also by who the Rupees were struck, the period, place and purpose as well as the standard rate of alloy as determined previous to coining". The data published by Clunes in his memorandum was not corroborated with numismatic evidence until K K Maheshwari and K W Wiggins made some use of it in their monograph ' *Maratha * *Mints and Coinage* ' (Nasik, 1989) and illustrated a page from the manuscript on p. 15. Although the memorandum contains important information about coin circulation in and around Pune, Maheshwari & Wiggins employed it essentially in a 'numismatic' sense - to identify mint towns such as Chambhargonda, Tembhurni, Belapur etc which feature in it as places where mints had been in operation, and to attribute coins using clues afforded by Clunes, such as in the case of their discussion about the 'Ankushi' Rupees. Here we find a chart compiled from Clunes' information (p. 22-23) and then a remark "this may be the Wai Sikka Dooboondkee" for a rupee, listed as T5 wherein two dots feature in the reverse design, referring to an attributive term used by Clunes. A word may be said here about who John Clunes was. P L Gupta, in his introductory remarks seems to dismiss him as 'some employee of the Company'. John Clunes appears to have begun his career in the Bombay Army - in vol. X of the 'Asiatic Annual Register' we find his name in the list of 'Bombay military promotions' in 1807-8, when he was made an ensign. In 1822, he was a lieutenant and took action against a party of Bheels, as indicated in India Office Records file IOR/F/4/628/17112(2). Just before the 'memorandum' was submitted, he was a captain in the army and also the postmaster at Pune - in vol. 26 of the 'Asiatic Journal and Monthly Miscellany', July-December 1828, we find references to him with these two job titles and also the information that he conceived a 'new plan for facilitating travelling'. Under this scheme, 'Hamalls' or manual labourers, who facilitated movements of goods while in transit, were to be given land and encouraged to settle in villages which adjoined the main routes of transit between Bombay and Pune. Their services were to be requested by applying to 'the postmaster at Poona' whereby they could be requisitioned to perform duty at cardinal junctures en route. In this report, Clunes' efficiency is applauded by the following remark: - "Knowing, as we do, how zealous Capt. Clunes uniformly is in prosecuting every measure he undertakes, we hope to see a system soon perfected here...".

Transport and thoroughfare were subjects of Clunes' interest as a postmaster, as evidenced by a book that he published in 1826, entitled ' *Itinerary and Directory for Western India* ' which lists routes 'through the Deccan, Konkan, Carnatic, Khandesh, Gujerat, Cutch and Malwa' to which an appendix was added in 1828. He eventually retired as a lieutenant-colonel and authored two other books - ' *Origins of the Pinadries* ' (written anonymously in 1818) and ' *An Historical Sketch of the Princes of India* ' (1833). These references indicate that John Clunes was an important secondlevel officer in the East India Company's activities in the Deccan in the second decade of the 19 th century. Apart from its original publication by Gupta in 1965 and scant use by Maheshwari & Wiggins, the memorandum submitted by John Clunes virtually slipped into numismatic oblivion. It was, therefore, a matter of delight that a coin was recently spotted in 'Oswal Auctions' (no. 18, lot 80, Pune, 4 December 2010)  that can be attributed using clues provided by Clunes. The coin was acquired by Mr K V Pandit of Pune and is published here with his kind permission. It is illustrated here as fig. 1 and described as follows:

*                                 Fig. 1                                      Fig. 2 *

*Obv*: Legend in three lines - *(sikka mub* ā *rak/ b* ā *)d sh* ā *h gh(* ā *z* ī */ * *sh)* ā *h '* ā *lam * with date 1(20?X?) above the 'h' of *sh* ā *h*. * * *Rev*: Partially visible formulaic ' *jul* ū *s'* legend in three lines. A prominent ' *shr* ī ' ( ी ), with a retrograde 'comma' above, is placed within the 's' of *jul* ū *s*. To its left, ' ẓ *arb* ' and below it an 'S'-like curve which is the 'shosha' of the letter ' *k* ā *f* ', forming part of the mint name inscribed below the horizontal line. On page 4 of the memorandum, Clunes mentions a coin named 'Nuo Shree Sicca', with a value of 110 (corresponding to 100 Poona Halli Siccas, or 'Standard Rupees of Account') and a standard alloy of 8.523 and 8.807. These presumably are the alloy figures for two rupees that were tested when the memorandum was being compiled. Further to these details, Clunes adds, "This rupee was coined by Amrut Rao during the six months of 1802-03 during which he enacted Pageant Peshwa during the ascendancy of Holkar; it has the figure '9' upon it in addition to the ी to distinguish it from the other Shree Sicca coins; hence Nuo Shree Sicca". It is evident that the retrograde 'comma'-like device appearing above the ' *shr* ī *'* (see enlargement, fig. 2) on the reverse of this coin is nothing but the Devanagari (Marathi) numeral '9'. Therefore, it will be appropriate to identify this coin as the 'Nuo Shree Sicca' described by Clunes. 'Nuo' is an alternative spelling for 'Nau' ( नऊ ) meaning 'nine' in Marathi. Clunes is clear about what this additional mark is and when it was added to the design, so as to distinguish the variety from 'other Shree Sicca coins', of which he describes two - one 'Shree Sicca' which was changed at the rate of 109 to 100 Poona Halli Siccas and the other, which passed at 112.8 to 100 Poona Halli Siccas. The description of the first coin is scant; Clunes only says that it is "supposed to have been struck by Madhoo Rao the great, and has ' ी ' upon it".  The second, according to Clunes, was "struck 25 years ago by Rastia at the village of Menwulee near Waee, and is inferior to Amrut Rao's Shree Sicca". He adds, "as intended, it passed current at the same rate as the Shree Sicca of Madhoo Rao, Peshwa, till discovered, when the mint ceased to work".
A bit of clarification is needed here with reference to the personalities that Clunes' mentions. 'Madhoo Rao, the great' ostensibly refers to Madhav Rao, the young and dynamic Peshwa who took the reins of his office in 1761 after the death of his father, Balaji Bajirao, alias Nanasaheb, following the great Maratha debacle at the 3 rd battle of Panipat. The qualifier 'the great' presumably separates him from a homonymous Peshwa who succeeded him in 1774. Tuberculosis killed Madhav Rao in 1772, but during the eleven years of his reign he did a great deal to reinstate Maratha power by keeping in check the Nizam of Hyderabad and Haider Ali of Mysore. The Marathas also reached their former glory in north India when they successfully avenged their defeat at Panipat by annihilating the Rohilla chief, Najib udDaula in 1772. 'Rastia' refers to the family known by their Marathi surname 'Rastey', who were powerful bankers and landed aristocrats in the south Maharashtra - north Karnataka region and also relatives of the Peshwas (the mother of Madhav Rao was née Rastey). Wai, on the banks of the Krishna river in Satara district of present day Maharashtra State, was a stronghold of the Rasteys, but they also controlled mints at Bagalkot, Bijapur and Athni (vide Maheshwari & Wiggins, ' *Maratha Mints and Coinage* ', pp. 44-46, 51-52). The 'Shree Sicca' produced by the Rasteys was conceivably inferior to 'Madhoo Rao's' as well as 'Amrut Rao's' Shree Siccas and the mint was closed when the debasement was 'discovered'. While the 'Shree Sicca' of the second variety was struck at 'Menwulee, near Waee' according to Clunes, there is no mention as to where 'Madhoo Rao's or 'Amrut Rao's' coins were struck. G H Khare published some documents ('A Report on the Maratha Mints of the Peshwa Period located at Poona, Chakan and Chinchwad, both near Poona', *JNSI*, vol. 37, 1974, pp. 102-109) to indicate that 'Shree Sicca' rupees were coined at Chakan, located about 30 km northeast of Pune. According to Khare, the mint at Chakan was set up to alleviate the shortage of specie caused by the withdrawal of the Poona Halli Sicca, in turn precipitated by the influx of debased 'Chandwad'-type Rupees struck at Vaphgaon and the subsequent fall in the Poona rupee's value. The master of the new mint at Chakan was asked to produce coins comparable in value to the Chandwad rupees so that the currency market in Pune could have enough circulating specie and, thus, the Poona Halli Sicca could regain its value. Khare also found details of the mint's production of 'Shree Sicca' rupees (published as 'Shree Sikka Rupee', in *Bharata Itihas Samshodhana Mandala Quarterly*, vol. XIX, no.4, 1939) - 673,100 pieces were produced between 1793 and 1800, except 1796, when no coins were struck at Chakan. Maheshwari & Wiggins ascribed coins in the name of Shah 'Alam II with ' *shr* ī ' as a distinguishing mark on the reverse to Chakan and tentatively read the mint name as 'Mominabad Chakan', remarking upon the fact that the mint indicator ' ẓ *arb* ' was placed next to the ' *jul* ū *s* ' in the second line of the reverse inscription, because the "mint name was of such a length that it was impossible to position it in the usual place to the right of the word ' *jal* ū *s* '". Following Khare and subsequently Maheshwari & Wiggins, the 'Shree Sicca' rupees are attributed to Chakan mint. Since the 'Nuo Shree Sicca' described here also bears a general resemblance to the coins listed by Maheshwari & Wiggins, it would be plausible that it bears the same mint name. Clunes' description about the 'Shree Siccas' coined by 'Rastia' and 'Madhoo Rao, the great' are confusing to say the least. If, as Khare mentions, the mint at Chakan began functioning only in the last decade of the 18 th century, its inception would be dated almost two decades after the death of Madhav Rao Peshwa, or 'Madhoo Rao, the Great'. Also, there is no numismatic evidence available to suggest that the 'Rastia' struck a 'Shree Sicca' coin at 'Waee'. Judging by Clunes' own ascription, there was a mint at Wai producing 'Ankushi' rupees known as 'Waee Sikka Dooboondkee'. One has to conclude, therefore, that Clunes' information here is either erroneous and/or based on inaccurate

data collected through his informants. This is not entirely surprising, because incongruence is noticed at other places in Clunes' memorandum. Clunes seems to be aware of some such instances - for example, at the end of his memorandum, he lists two rupees as 'Arkati' rupees, presumably struck at Arcot as judged from this appellation, but notes in comment that, in reality, one of them was struck at Allahabad and the other at Itawa. Conceivably, these were shown to Clunes as 'Arkati' rupees by his informants and Clunes was intelligent enough to make such a remark. On the other hand, his views on the origins of certain marks on Maratha coins, such as the 'Parshu' (battle axe) or 'Ankush' (elephant goad) reflect his credulousness at the information he was being fed with by his informants. Clunes mentions that the 'Nuo Shree Sicca' was "coined by Amrut Rao during the six months of 1802-03, during which he enacted Pageant Peshwa during the ascendancy of Holkar". This brings us to the historical context regarding the issue of the 'Nuo Shree Sicca. To understand who 'Amrut Rao' was and why he was a 'Pageant Peshwa' in 1802-3 requires an exposition about events, dates and personages involved in the history of fin-de-18 ème -siècle Deccan. Amrut Rao was the adopted son of Raghunath Rao, the uncle of Madhav Rao the elder, who made a bid for the Peshwa's office after the murder of Narayan Rao, the successor and younger brother of Madhav Rao, in 1773. Raghunath Rao was implicated in the murder and his bid was thwarted by a ministerial alliance of civil and military officers of the Maratha Confederacy, who installed as Peshwa the infant son of Narayan Rao as Madhav Rao II and outmanoeuvred Raghunath Rao, securing political moves and military victories. Raghunath Rao craved for a male heir and adopted a boy in 1768, but a son was later born to him in 1775. This son grew up to become Baji Rao II, the last Maratha Peshwa. Raghunath Rao surrendered in 1783 to the ministerial combine, now headed by Nana Phadnees, the shrewd and astute minister, who imprisoned him along with his family at Kopargaon, where he died later in the same year. A third son was born to him posthumously. His name was Chimnaji, alias Appa. After Raghunath Rao's death, Amrut Rao continued living at Kopargaon till 1792. He lived at Anandwalli near Nasik between 1792 and 1794 and then till 1796 at the fort of Shivneri, near Junnar. In 1796, the forces of Daulat Rao Sindhia took charge of him and moved him to Jamgaon. Events in 1795 marked the beginning of events which culminated in the downfall of the Peshwa's powers in 1818 - a course which elicited the historian James Grant Duff's famous remark "Never was an Empire so foolishly lost". The young Peshwa Madhav Rao II, died after falling from the balcony of his residence, the 'Shaniwar Wada' palace in Pune. The de facto ruler of the Maratha Confederacy at this time was Nana Phadnees. Since the Peshwa had died childless, the next in line to his office was Baji Rao, his cousin once removed, who was the son of Raghunath Rao, Nana's arch rival, whom he had successfully challenged, defeated and captured. Apart from the long-standing enmity between Raghunath Rao and his family and Nana, there was also a financial side to these politics. While in charge of the kingdom for the Peshwa, Nana had advanced huge sums of money to various people on his behalf. These loans would pass on to the legitimate male heir of the Peshwa, who was either born to him or adopted as his son. Baji Rao, not being the direct descendent of the late Peshwa, was under no obligation to fulfil such patrimonial commitments and there was every chance he would refuse to pay the loans (which he indeed did!), Nana being left with the burden. The politics that resulted out of this mess plagued the Maratha Confederacy for the next five years. Baji Rao was an inept, suspicious and a volatile man. The Sindhia and the Holkar were other influential factors in the equation. They were once the trusted pillars of the confederacy, but during 1795-1800, their rivalry took a vicious turn. The Sindhia, 'old man' Mahadaji, died
in 1794, leaving his young and headstrong son, Daulat Rao, in charge of vast fortunes. Similarly, the Holkar, 'old man' Tukoji, died in 1797 and the Holkars' fortunes were inherited by Kashi Rao, his eldest son, who was an imbecile. But his three brothers, namely Malhar Rao, Yashwant Rao and Vithoji Rao, took the reins of the family's domains. Daulat Rao Sindhia, as equally inept as Baji Rao and fuelled by vengefulness, thought this was his moment to seize the Holkar tracts. He managed to raid the Holkars' base near Pune and kill Malhar Rao, while the rest of the kin fled. This caused a rift between the Holkar brothers, Yashwant Rao and Vithoji, and Daulat Rao Sindhia, that never healed. With Sindhia's attack, the Holkars' fortunes hit their lowest ebb. The Holkar brothers spent the next three years wandering in the Deccan and Malwa, gathering strength, leading a life of depredation and living off looting the Sindhia's territories. Baji Rao finally succeeded in becoming the Peshwa at the end of 1796, but only after winning Daulat Rao Sindhia's support and promising him tenures and cash worth 2.5 million rupees. At this time, Amrut Rao was brought from Jamgaon to Pune by Sindhia's troops. Baji Rao's relations with Amrut Rao were cordial to begin with, and he appointed his adoptive brother his financial executor ( *Diwan* ). But suspicious as he was, he soon began to doubt Amrut Rao's intentions. Baji Rao could not pay the Sindhia his dues and, when the money he had promised to Sindhia could not be made available, Sindhia imposed fresh taxes on the rich inhabitants of Pune, and tortured them when they refused to pay up. The finances of the realm became a mess. As the *Diwan*, Amrut Rao resented these developments but could not do more than resign from his post and move to Junnar in July 1800. In the meantime, the Holkar brothers went from strength to strength in their war against the Sindhias. While Yahswant Rao concentrated on Malwa, his brother Vithoji carried out a series of raids in the Deccan. As Baji Rao was the Sindhia's protégé, he came under the Holkars' flack as well. Removing Baji Rao and the Sindhia from political power became the sole aim of the Holkar brothers' activities. Knowing the ineptitude of his adoptive brother and his Sindhia allies, Amrut Rao decided to side with the Holkars. He invited Yashwant Rao to the Deccan and promised him a sum of money for deposing Baji Rao from the Peshwa's office. Closer to home, Vithoji Holkar proclaimed himself as his agent and pursued the campaign against Baji Rao, staking the claims of the Peshwa's office for Amrut Rao. In April 1801, Vithoji Holkar was captured in one of the skirmishes by Baji Rao's men and brought to Pune. Baji Rao had him killed by tying him to the feet of an elephant to be dragged around the palace courtyard. He and his cronies witnessed this cruel spectacle with great glee. When Yashwant Rao learnt about this uncouth act, he was incensed. He immediately moved south and appeared in the Deccan, inflicting defeat on the Sindhia's troops as he advanced. The fact that Sindhia's troops could not stop Holkar's advances sent Baji Rao into a panic and he fled from Pune. Yashwant Rao marched on Pune on Diwali day (25 th October) in 1802 and set flame to the Peshwa's hapless capital. The Peshwa's palaces were looted and so were the houses of many of the rich inhabitants of the city, and the treasury was plundered. After the city was sacked, Yashwant Rao invited Amrut Rao to become the Peshwa and brought him from Junnar to Pune. On 12 November 1802, Amrut Rao took the reins of the Peshwa's office; however he vacillated and did not officially declare himself as the Peshwa for fear of facing the charge of having deposed his adoptive brother. Yashwant Rao then proposed that Amrut Rao's son, Vinayak Rao, be adopted as the late Peshwa Madhav Rao's son and given the Peshwa's office. Amrut Rao agreed to this arrangement and Vinayak Rao was declared Peshwa on 22 December 1802. In the meantime, Baji Rao, having fled from Pune, sought refuge with the British. Richard Wellesley, the Governor-General

could not have hoped for better. He took the opportunity to make Baji Rao agree to the infamous 'subsidiary alliance' treaty. This treaty was signed by Baji Rao on 31 December 1802 at Vasai near Bombay. Now the Peshwa was effectively a vassal of the British and they became his 'protectors'. As part of the deal, British troops under Arthur Wellesley's command escorted Baji Rao back to Pune. Ominous as these developments were, Amrut Rao tried hard to form an alliance of all Maratha chiefs against the Baji Rao-British combine in the first quarter of 1803. However, sagacity and unity were not the forte of the Marathas, and Amrut Rao's efforts failed. Yashwant Rao Holkar left Pune in March 1803, having plundered the city for four months. Baji Rao arrived in Pune on 13 May 1803 with his British masters and ended the 'pageantry' of Amrut Rao's putative Peshwa-ship. He also annulled the adoption of his son, Vinayak Rao. Col. Wellesley then offered Amrit Rao a tenure worth 0.8 million rupees and, in return, successfully seperated him from a possible Maratha coalition against the British. The deal was done on 14 August 1803. Amrut Rao left Pune for Nasik and eventually chose to retire to Benares, where he arrived at the end of 1805. Amrut Rao spent his last days at Benares and died in September 1824. His son, Vinayak Rao, alias Bapusaheb, inherited his estate. In 1829, the family moved from Benares to Kerwee near Banda, which they had been assigned in tenure by the British in 1818. After the family moved to Kerwee, the estate of Chitrakoot was added to its tenure. The official titles of the family were 'Maharaja' and 'Rao of Kerwee'. After Vinayak Rao's death in 1853, the title of 'Maharaja' was withdrawn and his adoptive sons, Narayan Rao and Madhav Rao, were nominated his successors. During the insurrection of 1857-59, Kerwee was sacked by the armies of General Whitlock. Narayan Rao and Madhav Rao were accused of colluding with the rebels. Narayan Rao was stripped of his titles and sentenced to life imprisonment at Hazaribagh, where he died in 1860. Madhav Rao then became the 'Rao of Kerwee'. His descendents presently reside in Pune. To conclude, we come back to the 'Nuo Shree Sicca' - it is evident that the issue of this coin was precipitated when Yashwant Rao Holkar plundered Pune and Amrut Rao was nominally in charge. Perhaps it was struck to alleviate a sudden necessity for cash to provide for the Holkar's troops. In all likelihood, the coins were struck at Chakan and brought to Pune, because Holkar's depredations would have rendered the mints at Pune defunct. It is equally possible that it was struck at a make-shift mint at Pune itself, even though it bears the mint-name Chakan. Perhaps the Chakan 'Shree Sicca' was chosen as a model because it fared better in exchange value over the more current Chandwad and 'Halli Sicca' rupees. The only aspect of the coin that remains to be discussed is the trace of a date that it bears. From what is extant, it can be restored to 120X, but that creates a difficulty. If it is regarded as AH 12001209, it would correspond to AD 1785-94, which is more than a decade earlier than the Amrut Rao episode. There can be two explanations for this - 1. The date is to be reckoned not as AH but in a different  calendar. There was a 'Sursan' ('Shuhur San') reckoning followed in Maharashtra, calculated on the basis of a 'harvest year'. Sursan 1203 fits 1802-03 so perhaps the date is 1203. 2.The date is to be reckoned as AH, but is a 'frozen date' inherited from the Chakan 'Shree Sicca' prototype. According to Khare, the mint at Chakan had began functioning sometimes in the early 1790's. This fits well with the AH date being 1205-09. This would also explain why the mark of ' *shr* ī ' was modified with the figure of a '9' placed over it - the addition would help to render the date as a 'vestige' by effectively being a differentiating factor between the prototype and the issue which followed it.
**UNDISCOVERED INDIAN COINS ** ** ** By Hans Herrli In the pre-modern Islamic countries and especially in India, *khutba* and *sikka* were the two most important public prerogatives of sovereignty. Whereas mentioning his name in the sermon at the Friday noon prayer in the congregational mosques meant * * accepting the sovereignty and suzerainty of a ruler, omitting his name from the sermon was an open declaration of rebellion and independence. The right to mint coins with his own name offered a ruler the added possibility to make his name known in a whole country, far beyond the cities and the congregations of their Friday mosques *. * As the minting right was considered crucial in defining a ruler's standing, Indian historians tended to attribute coins to almost every pretender to a throne or to at least partially successful rebels. Their allegations can often be disregarded because the pretender clearly lacked the means or the facilities necessary for coining, but some instances reported in historical works are still highly plausible. Coins issued by pretenders and rebels were normally silver coins used to pay troops and issued in fairly limited numbers. As Indian silver coins tended to end sooner or later in the melting pot, survivors from small coinages are rare, and, as they will usually be very similar to other contemporary coins, they are easily overlooked or their legends misread and misinterpreted by collectors and numismatists. 70 The few following examples of yet undiscovered coins may perhaps incite some collectors to have another look at dubious or unidentified pieces in their collections. ***Mirza Yadgar Nasir Beg, half-cousin of the Mughal emperor, *** ***Humayun *** Babur, the founder of the Indian Mughal dynasty, had advised his son and successor, Humayun, to treat his brothers, Kamran, Askari, and Hindal, generously, and Humayun took this as an excuse to pamper them and his cousin, Mirza Yadgar Nasir; to appoint them to high positions and to forgive them their repeated treacheries. In return his brothers, who all coveted the throne of Hindustan, and Yadgar Nasir hindered him at every step and betrayed him. For about 20 years there was hardly a time when not at least one of these close relatives was involved in a seditious act. 71 After his conquest of Gujarat in 1535, Humayun gave Mirza Yadgar Nasir Nahrwala Patan in jagir, but 9 months later he lost it to the returning Sultan Bahadur Shah of Gujarat. The Mirza then became the jagirdar of Kalpi, which he successfully defended against a son of the rising Afghan usurper, Sher Shah, but when Sher Shah Suri defeated Humayun in the battles of Chausa (1539) and Kanauj (17 May 1540) Yadgar Nasir fled with the Emperor and the rest of the Mughal army to Sind. In Sind, Humayun expected aid from Husain Shah Arghun, the Amir residing at Tatta, who had been a nominal vasall of Babur, but for several reasons Husain Shah was not well disposed to the 70 * * A typical case was described in an article by J. Lingen and P. Stevens in JONS 201, 2009. The   authors presented a rupee of Akbar 'Adil Shah, a grandson of Aurangzeb and an ephemeral puppet emperor   created by Nawab Safdar Jang in AH 1753. The very rare coin was already known and published, but it had only been superficially studied and therefore incorrectly attributed. 71 Several websites (e.g. "Sindh rulers with coins") erroneously call Mirza Yadgar Nasir the uncle of Humayun. Humayun's uncle and Babur's halfbrother was Mirza Nasir, like Babur a son of the Timurid 'Umar Shaikh Mirza Miranshahi and grandson of Abu Sa'id Mirza Miranshahi. He was born in 1487 and died before his son, Yadgar, was born. (The Persian word *Yadgar* \[Remembrance\] usually indicates its bearer's posthumous birth.) Contemporary writers often called both the father and the son Mirza Nasir and so laid the foundations of an ongoing confusion.

Mughal Emperor. Babur had dispossessed the Arghuns from both Kabul and Qandahar, and Husain Shah knew very well that raising an army against Sher Shah would ultimately end in disaster. He, therefore, first tried to starve Humayun and his steadily shrinking army in order to force him to leave Sind, and when the Emperor tried unsuccessfully to take the strong fortresses of Bakkar and Sehwan, 72 he offered to acknowledge Mirza Yadgar Nasir as emperor, to read the *khutb* a in his name and to give him his daughter in marriage with the right of succession in Sind as her dowry. It was also reported that he had coins struck in Mirza Yadgar Nasir's name at Bakkar. As neither Husain Shah nor Humayun were strong enough for a decisive victory, their war finally led to a stalemate. When Husain Shah offered him 300 camels and 2000 loads of grain, Humayun accepted and, on 11 July 1543, he crossed the Indus and left Sind on the way to Qandahar and the refuge offered by Shah Tahmasp in Iran. The rift between Humayun and his cousin was never healed. When he was campaigning in the spring of the year 1546 in Badakhshan, Humayun ordered the governor of Kabul to strangle Yadgar Nasir, who, according to the emperor, had been tried and condemned to death for treachery. Although Husain Shah's striking of coins in the name of Mirza Yadgar Nasir would have been a valid stratagem in his quarrel with Humayun, such coins have never yet been found. The fact that neither Husain Shah nor his father, Shah Beg Arghun, ever struck any coins in their own name and that the fortress of Bakkar had never yet been the seat of a mint tends to render the existence of the Yadgar Nasir coins questionable, but in AH 950 ( AD 1543), the year in which Humayun left Sind, a series of rupees in the name of Sher Shah Suri and his successors began to be struck at Shergarh Bakkar. Husain Shah, who ruled Sind as a powerful and independent monarch, may well have established at Bakkar a mint that Sher Shah Suri then took over and that remained intermittently active until until the coinage of the Amirs of Khairpur in the 1250s AH.

| Sind only the Tuhfat al-kiram | mentions coins of this period: |
|:--- |:--- |
| "Mírzá Jání Beg (AH 993-1001 / AD 1585-1591) now began to take |  |
| some measures for the improvement of public affairs.... He |  |
| encouraged commerce and made some important changes in |  |
| weights and measures and coinage of money. It is said that before |  |
| that time no gold coins were used except the ashrafís bearing the |  |
| French mark or impression. Mirza 'Isa Tarkhan (AH 964-975 / AD |  |
| 1556-1567) had invented some copper money, that was called Ísáí. |  |
| Mírza Janí Beg now reduced its value and called it Mírí. He |  |
| caused similar reduction in the weights and measures, which |  |
| however was considered a bad omen in the midst of so much |  |
| happiness." 74 |  |
| 72 Bakkar is an island fortress between the towns of Rohri on the left and |  |
| Sukkur on the right bank of the river Indus, about 20 kilometres northeast |  |
| of Khairpur. Sehwan lies on the Indus 125 kilometres north of Hyderabad. |  |
| 73 | Stan Goron and J.P. Goenka: The Coins of the Indian Sultanates, New |
| Delhi 2001, pp. 490/491. |  |
| 74 | The Tuhfat al-kiram (Gift of the Generous) by Mir 'Ali Sher "Qani" |
| Tattavi, a poet and historian born in 1727 at Tatta, is a general history in 3 |  |
| volumes written in Persian and finished in 1767. The work has never been |  |
| completely translated into a European language, but Mirza Kalichbeg |  |
| Fredunbeg translated large parts of volume 3, a history of Sind, into |  |
| English and quoted them in his: A | History of Sind, Volume 2, Karachi | ---
**THE BASIS OF THE ACHENE AND HINDU-** **JAVANESE COINAGE ** ** ** By Hans Leyten In 1992, Robert S. Wicks 86 published a work on markets and trade in early southeast Asia and the development of indigenous monetary systems.  Most of his work is based on the Chinese trade and the Chinese weight system. In this book, Wicks writes that the standard for weights and measures for Java and Sumatra was based on the Indonesian Kati (on Java the Kati weights 615.2 grams 87 ). On Java, the Kati or Catty of 601 88 grams was known from the trade with China. It was the VOC in the the Dutch East Indies who introduced the new Kati of 615.2 grams. The difference between the Dutch Kati and the Chinese Catty is due to the fact that the Dutch made the Kati equal to 1¼ Dutch pounds Troy of 492.2 grams. Wicks goes on to state: 89

$$ 1 Kati = 16 (or 2090) Suvarna $$ 1 Suvarna = 16 Másha = 64 Kupang 1 Másha = 4 Kupang

Contrary to Wicks' statement, the Dutch Kati was actually divided into 16 Taels of 38.5 grams and not into 16 Suvarna. (The Chinese Catty was divided into 16 Taels of 37.6 grams 91 ). Starting from the Kati, he derives (with an impossible precision for a weight based on natural seeds.): 92

| 1 Suvarna | = 38.601 grams |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 1 Másha | = | 2.412 grams |
| 1 Kupang | = | 0.603 grams |

The Suvarna is the ultimate gold standard, which can be found in the Lilavati of Brahmegupta, who wrote his Algebra and Arithmetic about AD 600. Quoting from the "Algebra" 93, insofar as it relates to the weighing of gold:

*"A Gunjá (or seed of Abrus) is reckoned equal to two Barley-* *Corns (Yavas). * *Half ten Gunjás are called a Mashá by such as are conversant * *with the use of the balance. * *A Karsha contains sixteen of what are called Másha. * *A Pala four Karshas. * *A Karsha of gold is named Suvarna." *

If the "Barley-Grain" mentioned here is the "Grain Avoirdupois" of 0.0648 grams then the Gunjá or Ratti is 0.130 grams. This results in a Másha of 0.648 grams and a Suvarna of 10.37 grams. Robert Tye, in his book "Early World Coins and Early Weight Standards" 94 gives weights for the Gunjá or Ratti of 0.107 grams 95 and 0.115 grams 96, resulting in a Suvarna of 8.56 grams and 9.20 grams. (If one follows the rule that 5 Gunjás make a Másha and 16 Máshas forms a Suvarna.) But he also mentions a weight standard

| The Development of | Indigenous Monetary Systems to AD 1400, SEAP, |
|:--- |:--- |
| Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 1992 |  |
| 87 Doursther, Dictionnaire universel des poids et measures, 1976. Page 93. |  |
| 88 The Chinese Catty was equal to 1600 Candarins. (Candarin = 0.3757 |  |
| grams.) |  |
| 89 Page 252. |  |
| 90 Page 253. |  |
| 91 The Chinese Tael was equal to 100 Candarins. |  |
| 92 Page 253. |  |
| 93 Colebrooke, 1817. |  |
| 94 Robert Tye, Early World Coins, York, YO1 9RA, U.K., 2009, ISBN 0 |  |
| 9524144 3 0. |  |
| 95 | Page 152. |
| 96 | Page 154, for the Delhi Ratti. |

of 9.6 grams 97 for a Suvarna of 80 Rattis, a Másha of 0.6 grams and the Gunjá or Ratti of 0.120 grams. Tavernier 98 writes: * * *"The ordinary Rati varied from 1.75 to * *1.84 grains troy."* * * In the appendix is written: 99 "The ordinary Rati (the seed of the Abrus precatorius) varied from 1.75 up to 1.9375 grains troy, the mean of which is 1.843 grains troy." Thus a *Gunjá* ( *Krisnala, or Ratti* ) 100 of 0.113 to 0.1256 grams gives an average *Gunjá* of 0.119 grams. This results in the weight of the *Másha* being between 0.565 and 0.628 grams (average 0.596 grams) and the *Karsha* (or *Suvarna* ) between 9.04 and 10.05 grams (average 9.54 grams). The Hindu Java gold coins of around AD 1200, form a series of 9.6 - 4.8 - 2.4 - 1.2 - 0.6 grams. The later ( AD 1200-1700) Sumatra gold coins of Samudra-Pasai and Acheh form a series of 2.4 - 1.2 - 0.6 - 0.3 grams. These series correspond rather well to a weight standard of 9.6 grams 101 for a Suvarna of 80 Rattis, and hence a Másha of 0.6 grams and the Gunjá or Ratti of 0.120 grams. The name for gold in old Java literature is "Su", short for Suvarna and corresponding to the heaviest coin. The dominant Sumatran coin of 0.6 grams was called a "Mas" in the adat-law. So it seems to me very probable that the Suvarna on Java was equal to an Indian Karsha of 80 Gunjás (and not 1/16  of the Chinese or Dutch Kati) and weighed about 9.6 grams. Wicks' Suvarna of 38.601 grams in fact resembles more the Indian Pala, or the modern Chinese Tael.  In effect, Wicks mistakes the Tale (or Tael) for the Suvarna. Thus, the  Suvarna is one quarter of what Wicks proposes, and his table would best be rounded off to read:

1 Suvarna    = 9.6  grams 1 Másha      = 0.6  grams 1 Kupang    = 0.15 grams

I, therefore, contend that  the coin of Samudra-Pasai and Acheh must be based on the Másha of approx. 0.6 grams as earlier published 102, and to base it upon a Kupang of 0.6 grams 103 is misguided Likewise, his statement that the gold and silver Hindu coins of Java, of 2.4 grams, are struck on the basis of the Másha 104 of 2.4 grams misleads because the Másha weighed 0.6 grams. These coins are on the weight of the Sana, which is ¼ Suvarna or 20 Máshas. But the most fundamental problem in Wicks' case is that of assuming that the Suvarna weighed 38.6 grams rather than 9.6 grams.   The coins and weights fall much more readily into line with the well-known nomenclature and standards of traditional Hindu weight systems once this error is removed

97 Page 154. 98 Tavernier, 1676, Vol. II, in footnote on page 69. 99 Tavernier, 1676, Vol. I, page 333. 100 The Ratty or Gunjá are the red seeds, the Krisnala is the black seed, but of the same weight. 101 Page 154. 102 J. Leyten, Jaarboek voor Munt- en Penningkunde 91, Amsterdam 2004. 103 Page 236 and page 241. 104 Page 249 and page 255.
# **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 206 ** ** ** Page

ONS meetings, Cologne 2010; UK and Blaubeuren 2011 ONS meeting New York, 8 January 2011

Seventh century Syrian numismatic round table 2011 New members Members' news New and recent publications Auction news Other news

Book review: *Gold coins in the collection of the Asiatic Society*, ed. Sutapa Sinha, review by N Rhodes

Two Seleucid coppers from the Bukharan Oasis, by Aleksandr Naymark & Aleksei Yakovlev

A coin of Kaykhusraw b. Marzuban, the forgotten Sallarid, by Farbod Mosanef A new dinar from Sana'a, by Yahya Jafar

A new coin type of the Sayyid, Abu al-Fadl Ja'far III b. 'Ali, Ja'farid emir of Tiflis, by I. Paghava & S. Turkia

Influence of Kannada in the gold coins of the Eluru hoard, by Govindraya Prabhu Sanoor

A new title of Sultan Shams al-Din Iltutmish on his coins issued from Bengal, by S.M. Iftekhar Alam

A speculative catalogue of some Ratlam coins, by Barry Tabor

Coins of the Sikhs: the Nanakshahi couplet, by Gurprit Singh Dora

The 'Nuo Shree Sicca' - a Maratha rupee, by Shailendra Bhandare Undiscovered Indian coins, by Hans Herrli

The basis of the Achene and Hindu-Javanese coinage, by Hans Leyten

*Printed by Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, UK.     *