# Journal of the Oriental Numismatic Society

# ISSN 1818-1252

# dtc: es

Assistant Editor: Robert Bracey, Dept. of Coins & Medals, British Museum, London WC1B 3DG, UK xy

## ONS News Members' News Shams Eshragh receives prize

On 28 May, which coincided with World Museum and Cultural

Heritage Day, at a ceremony performed in Chehelsotoun Palace and Museum, Isfahan, Shams Eshragh received a prize from Dr Zaker Isfahani, Governor-General of Isfahan province, for his recently published book Silver Coinage of the Caliphs (reviewed in JONS 202). Our congratulations to Shams on this award. Shams Eshragh receiving his prize

Michael Robinson has copies for sale of his two publications with Lewis Shaw. The price of The Coins and Banknotes of Burma will shortly rise to £32 but he is offering it to ONS members at the
reduced price of £20 incuding surface postage. He also has copies of their booklet The Die Varieties of Nineteenth Century Burmese Copper Coins for £5 including postage. In addition there are some books on Burmese history and numismatic books on various oriental and non-oriental topics. For further information please
contact him at michael-robinson@tinyonline.co.uk

# Summer 2010

# enc Annual ONS Meeting Utrecht 16 October 2010

'The annual meeting of the Oriental Numismatic Society in the Netherlands will be held on Saturday, 16 October 2010, at the
premises of the Geldmuseum (Money Museum) Leidseweg 90, Utrecht. Members from continental Europe will receive information separately with this Journal. All others and those who
have not received the programme for the meeting can find it at the ONS website (<https://www.onsnumis.org).>

The program of lectures has not yet been finalised, but
presentations on Sasanian, Islamic and Indian subjects are foreseen.

In addition, the Geldmuseum has, as always, some very interesting exhibitions. These exhibitions can be viewed during
the lunch-break, when the museum library, too, can be visited. As is the tradition, at the end of the meeting a small auction of oriental coins and related books will be held. The proceeds of this auction is a welcome addition to ONS funds. All the lots of this auction will, be uploaded to the ZENO.RU Oriental Coins Database, by the middle of September.

Members who wish to attend the meeting are invited to
contact Jan Lingen, the Regional Secretary for continental Europe, lingen@wxs.nl no later than 12 October 2010. ONS Meeting Cologne

The regular meeting in Cologne is planned for Saturday, 13 November 2010. For more information, please contact Mr N. Ganske (e-mail: nikolaus. ganske @ra-ganske.de).

## New Members No new members are reported for this issue.

## Lists Received and Auction News

New and Recent Publications A catalogue of the Islamic gold coinage of the first three
centuries of the Hijra era has just been published, entitled Arabic Gold Coins. Corpus I. The author is Giulio Bernardi. Clothbound, A4, 410 pp, well-illustrated. The book is published by EUT (Edizioni Universita Trieste). ISBN: 978-88-8303-284-4 Price: 80 € plus shipping.

This first volume covers the period from the Umayyad caliph, 'Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, until the deposition of the Abbasid caliph, al-Mustakfi at the beginning of the Buwayhid domination ( AH 334 / AD 946 ), with a comprehensive compilation and guide analising in detail all issues listed with their rulers, mints and dates. About 20,000 examples from about 500 collections are meticulously recorded, with illustrations and legends provided. The author has also added indications of the coins' availability and rarity. Purchases can be made through Giulio Bernardi S.R.L.,  via Roma 3, I 34121 Trieste (Italy). <https://www.numismaticabernardi.com;> email: \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* **Other News** *Islamic Reference Works Change Ownership* The copyrights of two important publications in the field of Islamic numismatics have been acquired by Celator, Inc., a registered corporation in the state of Wisconsin.  Wayne G. Sayles, president of Celator, Inc. made the announcement on 22 May 2010 following the signing of an agreement with Emine Nur Diler, widow of the acclaimed Turkish numismatist, Ömer Diler.  The works involved in this transfer of ownership include *Ilkhans: Coinage of the* *Persian Mongols,* published in 2006 (now out of print)  and *Islamic* *Mints: Islam Darp Yerleri,* published in 2009.  The first of these two extraordinary works, *Ilkhans*, is a 655 page + 12 colour-plate large format study of more than 7,000 types and variations known to the author.  It is a work that is unparalleled in this field and will undoubtedly be the standard reference for many years to come. Islamic Mints is a magnum opus of 1,818 pages in three volumes detailing every known mint in the Islamic world.  The bibliography alone lists some 2,000 works. Ömer Diler was educated as a chemical engineer, but became interested in coins at the age of 27 when he received a rare Ottoman gold coin as a gift.  Primarily a collector in his early years, Diler evolved into a consummate researcher and scholar.  Sayles first became acquainted with Diler and his wife, Emine Nur, at their home in Alanya in the early 1990s.  He and the late William F. Spengler were travelling in Turkey at the time doing research for their book *Turkoman* *Figural* *Bronze* *Coins and* *Their* *Iconography*.  Ömer Diler died on 18 March 2005. Note: The Celator journal, formerly published by Celator, Inc. is now owned and published by Paradigm Numismatics and Publishing, Inc. and is not a party to this agreement. **Book reviews** ** ** *Auspicious Symbols and Ancient Coins of Myanmar*  by Than Htun (Dedaye), published 2007 by Avahouse Sdn Bhd, Selangor, Malaysia.  ISBN 978-983-43555-1-7; paperback, 222 pages, 330 Plates in text, mostly in colour, 2 insert maps. Price: starting at 60 US dollars

The author is from Myanmar (Burma) and has been studying Burmese coins for twenty-five years. This book is the fruit of his labours. On the one hand he has the advantage of first-hand knowledge of coin finds in Burma over several years, and yet at the same time the disadvantage of not being able to keep fully abreast of developments outside Burma. It appears that in Burma there are very few numismatists, philately being more popular. As such, his book deserves every encouragement. The book itself is well produced from a technical point of view, on good quality paper. The large number of plates are generally quite good, if sometimes rather on the dark side. Where there are multiple images on one plate the captioning is not always very clear and there are a few errors. The English has many minor mistakes in spelling and grammar but these do not cause any problems. By far the greatest part of the book is devoted to the ancient symbolic coins of Burma (rising sun, throne/temple, bull coins of Arakan etc.) and there is also much discussion of the meaning of
the symbols. Useful information on find spots is given, including some Umayyad coins found at Sriksetra. For this alone the book is indispensable for students of ancient Burmese coins. There is much less emphasis on the lead and tin coins of Pegu and Tenasserim, although they make an appearance here and there. Coins which are purely inscriptional, such as the silver of Arakan from the 15 th to 18 th century, are barely mentioned. There is an accidental inclusion of one quite modern piece, shown on page 58 and unfamiliar to the author. It is in fact  a pattern Japanese coin  from World War II which I discussed in an article in the Spink Numismatic Circular in 1982. Also included are the coins of Bodawpaya to Thibaw, marking the end of the Konbaung dynasty in 1885, and the book closes with a discussion of forgeries and foreign coins found in Burma. The section dealing with the coins of Mindon and Thibaw unfortunately contains a large number of errors which could be very confusing to anyone new to the subject. Some are listed below but I hope I may be permitted to recommend chapters 8 to 11 of my book with Lewis Shaw, *The Coins and Banknotes of* *Burma*, for a clearer presentation of this period.

P179 The Buddhist date 2325 equates in Burma to AD 1781/2, the accession year of Bodawpaya, not 1852/3. P180 The quotes from Richard Temple are erroneous, see our book for the correct information. Pp181-2 The book states that the peacock coins were issued in 1852-3 whereas it was November 1865. Although the correct Burmese year 1227 is given under the picture of the Mint, the AD date would not be clear on a casual reading to someone new to the subject. A brief explanation of the Burmese year, eg that 1227 is from April 1865 to April 1866, would have been helpful. P183 Mindon's copper coins are stated to be equivalent to 1/32 of a kyat; this should be 1/64. P185 The lion gold coins were issued in BE 1228, not 1247, there are four not five denominations, and they were struck one year, not fourteen, after the gold peacocks. The date of 1214 on the peacocks is the accession year (see comment above). P190 the date 1290 at the top of the page should be 1240.

My other criticism of the book is with the references. The list starting on page 212 contains many which are incomplete, for example missing the date. This is the case with references to my own book, where my co-author is also confused with William Shaw. Even when a date is given it is sometimes merely the date of a reprint, not the original. There is also often little or no link between the references in the list and the text itself. This makes it impossible to trace and follow up on any interesting statement made in the text. Finally, many recent relevant numismatic publications are not mentioned at all: there is for instance nothing from the ONS Newsletter/Journal. This is perhaps understandable given the author's isolated position. In conclusion, then, the book is to be welcomed as a valuable addition of source material on ancient Burmese coins, and indeed also on the more modern coins. There is for example on page 180 a new small denomination of Mindon's *shwepyisoe* coins dated 2396, although the weight is not given. The reader should, however, ideally come to the book already having some knowledge of the subject. Michael Robinson

*Index Geographicus Indicus: being a list....of the Principal * *Places....Indian Empire, with notes......With Maps* by J F Baness. This recent reprint by Newman and Co of Calcutta of a 112 page index of place names with over 200 pages of sundry notes, first published in 1881, is available in paperback from Amazon for around £18.  The author was the chief draftsman with the Survey of India.  Most of the data in it is nowadays also available in the official Gazetteers, which, being available on line, are now accessible to most coin collectors.  There are statistics and notes in this book that are not all in the Gazetteers, and it has some value as a place-finder.  In the original, there are a number of
maps, one for each section, that open out concertina-like.  These contain all the places in the lists, and much of the value of this publication in relation to this hobby relies on the maps. Unfortunately, the maps were scanned into the reprint without being opened, and they are therefore worthless.  If anybody can think of a dafter way to scan maps, I would be interested to hear about it.  The description of this work in the advertising material does not mention this fact, and it is easy to believe that the buyer will get a useful reference work, but his hopes are certain to be disappointed because of that one incredible omission.  If the 1881 original can be found at a reasonable price, it would probably be worth purchasing for the place list and maps. Barry Tabor **Articles**

**THE STANDING CALIPH COINS OF** **DAMASCUS:** **NEW DIE LINKS - NEW QUESTIONS** By Ingrid Schulze The Standing Caliph coins were introduced in Bil ā d al-Sh ā m during 'Abd al-Malik's first money reform in the early 690s. They show the caliph on the obverse and the symbol on steps 1 on the reverse. Till now 17 named mints are known on Standing Caliph coins. In particular the coins attributed to the Umayyad capital, Damascus, raise a lot of problems, as will be demonstrated in this article. The overwhelming majority of the Standing Caliph coins of Damascus are struck on flans with a diameter of about 17-18mm. The descriptions in the literature are content with the remark "blundered legends". Beginning with the more interesting reverses of some selected examples 2 a closer look at the inscriptions and the images themselves leads to the following results:

*                  a                                 b                                  c * *Fig. 1: Typical reverses* 3 The marginal legend is the *shah* ā *da* with some very special features: The *lam-alif* ligature is turned 90° to the right or to the left at 11h and 2h. The words *il* ā *h* and/or *all* ā *h* are sometimes written retrograde at 1h (a) or at 1h and 3h (b). Most striking and enigmatic is the sign
at 8h. In the position just before *ras* ū *l* one would expect to read *mu* ḥ *ammad*. Walker mentions this unusual way of writing 4, but might be wrong with his interpretation: he reads the "turned" *lam-alif* at 11h as the final *all* ā *h*; but it is more probable * * that this is the beginning of the *shah* ā *da* instead of usually at 1h - consequently the final *all* ā *h* is missing. In addition the sign could also serve as an

1 The mints of the jund Filastin form an exception: here the cursive **m** - adapted from Byzantine prototypes - remained in use. 2 The examples shown in fig. 1 to 3 are picked out from different coins; obverses, reverses and details do not correspond to each other. 3 The size of all pictured coins is scaled about 1.5:1. The coins are from the Schulze collection if not otherwise stated. 4 John Walker, *A Catalogue of the Arab-Byzantine and Post-Reform* *Umaiyad Coins*, London 1956, p. 27 no. 88.

"abbreviation" of *wahdahu*. In the mint name *dimashq* the initial *dal* is missing on most of the coins.

*                a* 5 *                            b* 6 *                               c* *Fig. 2: Typical obverses* The obverses too show the *shah* ā *da*, again with the "turned" *lam-* *alif* - (b) at 1h, and the particular

- (c) at 8h. The figure,  itself, is characterised by its headdress looking like a middle parting. A closer look to the "girdle band" shows some details which seem to be unique:

*a * * * *b* 7 * * *Fig. 3: Examples of "girdle band" details* On (a) the depiction of the object in question is like a wing, coming from the shoulder; (b) shows an additional decoration at the left strand looking like barbs. To summarise: the majority of the Standing Caliph coins of Damascus, the capital of the Umayyads, do not mention the caliph's name or title - as about 50% of the whole series do - but have the *shah* ā *da* on both sides of the coin, probably with the final *all* ā *h* missing, *il* ā *h* and/or *all* ā *h* sometimes written retrograde, and the words *mu* ḥ *ammad* and/or *wahdahu* garbled beyond recognition. Additional details occur which are not known from any other series of Standing Caliph coins. Several die links are to be observed within this group. However, despite the faults in writing, the engraving looks to be carefully executed, and the coins are usually struck on neat, round flans. Some other coins, connected by style to the described group:

5 Private collection UK. 6 Other specimens from this die are SICA no. 709 - Tony Goodwin, *Sylloge of Islamic Coins in the Ashmolean*, Volume 1: *The Pre-Reform* *Coinage of the Early Islamic Period*, Oxford 2002, and Walker no. 89. 7 Same die as Bellinger no. 549 - Alfred Bellinger, Coins from Jerash, 1928-1934, NNM no. 81, New York 1938.
*a                                               b * *Fig. 4: Obverses a and b from the same die; reverse (a) with mint* *name, reverse (b) with star instead* 8

*a* 9 *                                            b* *Fig. 5: Obverses a and b from the same die; reverses in different* *blundered style* * * * * *Fig. 6: Tiny coins with 14mm diameter*

* * *Fig. 7: Obviously irregular coins imitating the described group* * * Finally there is also a stylistic relation to the mule with a standing emperor obverse and a standing caliph reverse, recently presented and discussed by Ramadan 10.

8 Comparable combinations are to observe for the Standing Caliph coins of Amman and Qinnasrin. 9 Private collection UK. 10 Tareq Ramadan, "A rare Arab-Byzantine Hybrid coin of Damascus: an intriguing "mule" bearing a Standing Emperor obverse and a Sphere through pole-on-steps reverse", *ONSJ* 203, pp. 43 and 44.

*Fig. 8: "Mule" with standing emperor obverse and standing * *caliph reverse* 11 To show the complexity of the subject it should be mentioned that there are also mules the other way round:

*Fig. 9: "Mule" with standing caliph obverse and Umayyad * *Imperial Image reverse* 12 This combination exists from different dies. No die links have yet been identified between the normal Standing Caliph coins and either of these mules. Last but not least I would like to present the die links, promised in the title: *a* *b* *c*

*Fig. 10: Surprising die links * This linkage, discovered recently by a stroke of good fortune, seems to show nearly all the coins presented so far in a different light: The reverse of coin (a) is already known from fig.1 (a); coin (b) 13 with the same reverse shows an obverse with the inscription

11 Goodwin collection. A similar "mule" is known from Yubna, cf. Khalili - 199 nos. 1-3 - Tony Goodwin, *Arab-Byzantine Coinage: Studies in the* *Khalili Collection*, Volume IV, London 2005. 12 Collection of the Kadman Numismatic Pavilion, Eretz Israel Museum, Tel Aviv, 44679. 13 Goodwin collection. I am very grateful to Tony Goodwin for granting me the right of publication. See also Walker no. 91.
*mu* ḥ *ammad / ras* ū *l all* ā *h*. This obverse legend is the rule for the Standing Caliph coins from the mints in Filastin, with one significant difference: on the specimens of Filastin the word *ras* ū *l* is divided with the *ra* remaining on the left side. Coin (c) 14 from the same obverse die as (b) shows a "Filastin reverse" with the typical cursive **m** instead of the symbol on steps and *filast* ī *n* written to the right of the **m**. The word to the left remains an enigma: it might be read as *manjam* in the meaning of "mine" or "source", but does not give a hint to a concrete location. 15 If we considered coins (b) and (c) in isolation we would have no doubts about attributing them to an irregular mint, and if we do so, most of the Standing Caliph coins, hitherto attributed to Damascus, have to follow. In the forthcoming die study of the "PseudoDamascus" mint 16 we will see a similar phenomenon: a lot of Umayyad Imperial Image coins attributed to Damascus will have to be re-attributed to the "Pseudo-Damascus" mint due to die links. If we start from the premise that the majority of the Standing Caliph coins, naming *dimashq* as minting place were NOT struck there, the next question is inevitable: which coins finally *were* struck in Damascus? Another isolated, larger group naming *dimashq* are the socalled "Amman-related" Standing Caliph coins:

*a* 17 *                                b                                 c* 18 *Fig. 11: Examples of "Amman-related" coins* These coins are called "Amman-related" because they show some features typical for Amman: sometimes the robe is short with visible legs, and, on the reverse, the legend and/or mint name are written retrograde. Badly struck (b) and (c) share the same obverse. The attribution of these coins to the official mint of Damascus seems dubious as well. There are another two coin types:

*Fig. 12: A regular coin of Damascus?* This coin is carefully engraved with *bism all* ā *h* preceding the *shah* ā *da* and naming the caliph and his title - with one serious 14 A second known specimen is in the Goussous collection in the Ahlibank of Amman - publication forthcoming in Yarmouk Numismatics. 15 Many thanks to Stefan Heidemann, Robert Hoyland and Lutz Ilisch for sparing time to think about this word. 16 Tony Goodwin and Rika Gyselen, forthcoming. 17 Collection of the Kadman Numismatic Pavilion, Eretz Israel Museum, Tel Aviv, 8443. 18 Collection of the Kadman Numismatic Pavilion, Eretz Israel Museum, Tel Aviv, 44921.
flaw: the legend has changed sides and 'Abd al-Malik's name appears beside the symbol on steps and not - as usual - together with the figure. At least two different obverse and reverse dies are known with this interchange 19. *a* *b* 20 * *

*Fig. 13: Examples of regular coins of Damascus * Finally only the coins of fig. 13 have the appearance of regular coins from the mint of Damascus: The obverse legend is *li-'abd* *all* ā *h 'abd al-malik am* ī *r al-mu'min* ī *n*, the reverse legend is the *shah* ā *da*, and the mint name is written correctly with the initial *dal*. The diameter of these coins is 22mm. They are extremely rare 21, so that the output of the Umayyad capital seems to be comparable to the mint of Ba'albak - meagre. The surprising die links, presented in fig. 10, make the attribution of most of the coins with *dimashq* to the mint of Damascus questionable. Presumably some other mints produced different groups of coins in the name of Damascus. Due to the fact that, on coins bearing the mint name of the Umayyad capital Damascus, the caliph's name is missing we should consider the possibility that they were not struck under control of the central administration in Damascus but in a region governed with some independence. The stylistic connections to the mint of Amman and the die link to a coin in "Filastin style" point to a location to the south of Damascus, possibly to al-Urdunn, from where until now no Standing Caliph coins are known. However, we also know of a stylistic relationship to the mint of Hims to the north of Damascus:

*a * * * * * *b* *Fig. 14: Stylistic relationship in the obverses of a coin of * *Damascus (a) and Hims (b)* 22 19 cf. Walker no. 122 and SICA no. 715. 20 Collection of the Kadman Numismatic Pavilion, Eretz Israel Museum, Tel Aviv, 8444. 21 For example: There is none of this type in SICA, one in Walker (no. 121, same dies as fig. 13 (a)) and one in Khalili (p. 46 no. 57, same obverse die as fig. 13 (b)). 22 Both coins Goodwin collection.
The images of the obverses seem to have been cut by the same hand. The Hims coin (b) has the "regular" legend naming the caliph and his title. However, the large-module Damascus coin shows the *shah* ā *da* on both sides. As we have seen, the few selected groups of Standing Caliph coins bearing the mint name Damascus raise some new questions because they show a lot of irregularities in the legends, inscriptions and images; there are stylistic relationships to other mint places and mules. Currently we have no definitive explanations for these phenomena. Up to now it would appear that the mint name *dimashq* does not necessarily point to the Umayyad capital, but possibly to the province of Damascus. Unfortunately the size and the scope of the Umayyad provinces are not known; we only have unclear documentary sources from the ninth and tenth century 23. This article aims to put a question mark against the attribution of most of the Standing Caliph coins with the mint name *dimashq* to this city. It opens the door for a new approach to the structure of mint places of these coins. The initial impetus for this article was the discovery of the die link shown in fig. 10, but, as this short survey has shown, the majority of Damascus Standing Caliph coins are to some extent "irregular". What is now required is a comprehensive die study and an analysis of stylistic connections between the various groups of coins. *Acknowledgments* I am very grateful to Tony Goodwin for his valuable help and wise advice, to Andrew Oddy, Susan Tyler-Smith and Marcus Phillips for their input during our meetings, and to my husband, Wolfgang, for his patience and support. **A NEW ABBASID MINT**

| visitors who wished to take | advantage of that. This, of course, was |
|:--- |:--- |
| accompanied by music, singing and dancing. Thus, this was not |  |
| only an important contribution to the entertainment structure of the |  |
| time but it also generated revenue for the monks in addition to what |  |
| they earned from agriculture. |  |
| At first sight and without anything specifying which "Dayr" is |  |
| being referred to on the coin, one is rightly tempted to classify this |  |
| mint as yet another one of many enigmatic Islamic mints which |  |
| appear on coins the locations of which remain undetermined. |  |
| However, looking into some of the events of the year AH 184, it |  |
| appears that the Abbasid caliph, Harūn al-Rashīd (AH 170-193), |  |
| was in the city of al-Riqqa25 in Syria then. He is known to have |  |
| spent many summers there escaping the heat of Baghdad. In fact, |  |
| 23 Robert G. Hoyland, Numismatics and History of early Islamic Syria, in: |  |
| A. Oddy (ed.): Coinage and History in the Seventh Century Near East II, |  |
| Proceedings of the 12th Seventh Century Syrian Numismatic Round Table |  |
| held at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge on 4th and 5th April 2009 |  |
| (2010), p. 84. |  |
| 24 | In the writer's collection, 26.5mm, 2.88g. |
| 25 | The strategic importance of al-Riqqa was recognised early on by the |
he built a palace there called "Dar al-Salam", where he was usually accompanied by his favorite cousin wife Zubaida (d. AH 226), also known as Umm Ja'far, the daughter of Ab ī al-Fa ḍ l Ja'far b. al-Man ṣū r (d. AH 186). On their journey to al-Riqqa they would presumably pass some monasteries, the most famous of which is Dayr al-Rumman 26 (modern name: Dayr al-Zour) which is mentioned and described in Mu'jam al-Buldan by Yaqut alHamawi as " *A large city with markets situated between al-Riqqa* *and the al-Khabur river, on the caravan route from Iraq to Syria* " Today, Dayr al-Zour is a town located on the Euphrates river in Syria in a province of the same name. Like many cities in Syria, it has been known to exist, although by different names, at least, since Akkadian times. During Roman times, it was an important trading post between the Roman Empire and the East, and it was later on the caravan routes from Baghdad to Aleppo and from Damascus to Mosul etc. Dayr al-Rumman was, however, destroyed by the Mongols in their westward conquests but was resurrected by the Ottomans, provided with a proper administrative structure and became officially known as Dayr alZour from then onwards. Dayr al-Zour or Dayr al-Rumman is approximately 125 km east of the old  important town of al-Riqqa, also located on the Euphrates river, which was frequented by the caliph al-Rash ī d ( AH 170-193) who built an important palace there called Qa ṣ r alSal ā m Ja'far". Dayr al-Rumman was probably a resting place for the  caliphal convoy. Although I cannot be certain,  I suggest that the "al-Dayr", cited on the present dirhem, is the old Dayr alRumman, the current Dayr al-Zour. It is interesting that. even today. it is simply referred to by its inhabitants as "al-Dayr". The inscription on the coin suggests that its minting was ordered by Zubaida, Umm Ja'far  through her servant, Yasir. Zubaida was one of the most powerful ladies in the Abbasid court and the favourite of the caliph, Har ū n al-Rash ī d. She managed to convince the caliph to announce her son al-Am ī n ( AH 193-198) to be nominated first heir in preference to his older paternal brother, al-Ma'm ū n ( AH 198-218). She was the only Quraishi to bear a caliph and, on this dirhem, she boasts of her noble Quraishi Hashemite ancestry, being Umm Ja'far, daughter of Ab ī al-Fa ḍ l. This dirhem shows an uncanny resemblance to another Abbasid dirhem of the same date but minted in "al-Kamiliya" 27, which is still a mystery mint whose location remains, as far as I know, unidentified. The obverse of both coins is similar except for the mint name, while the centre of the reverse is exactly the same. The margins, however, show differing Quranic verses: the dirhem minted in 'al-Dayr" shows verse (56) Surat al-Maeda, while the other dirhem  shows Verse (64) of Surat al-Zakhraf. This important donative coin, minted in al-Dayr, must have been issued to celebrate an, as yet, unknown, occasion. For instance it may have  been ordered to celebrate the acquisition of a property, which could have been a whole town, bearing in mind that Zubaida was known to have been a major property owner, or simply, that the caliph gave orders that she should benefit from and receive all the revenue gained from that area. This, amongst other things, could have been the *jisya*, the tax paid by non- Muslims, since, by definition, "al-Dayr" indicates a Christian community. Moreover, perhaps the choice of the *Aya* on the reverse of the coin, which translates " *And whosoever takes Allah,* *his messenger and those who have believed, as protectors, then* *the party of Allah will be victorious* " suggests this. At any rate such inferences  remain speculative. This donative dirhem and the one minted in al-Kamiliya with the same date represent the first such issues by an Islamic lady.

| 26 | "Rumman" in Arabic means "pomegranate", for which that area is still |
|:--- |:--- |
| famous. |  |
| 27 | Sold Sotheby auction 22-23, March 1990, lot 173. | --- --- --- --- ---
*Marginal legend*: not visible *Reverse:* Inscription in a plain circle  

##,, &./ 

##  - 0 *Marginal legend*: not visible

*Fig. 16:  Reconstruction of the Qilich Arsl* ā *n kh* ā *q* ā *n type* * * *References:*

1. Bartold  - V.V.Bartold, "Turkestan v epohu mongolskogo  nashestvija", vol.1, Moscow 1963 (see also V.V.Bartold "Turkestan Down to the Mongol Invasion" (London: Luzac & Co) 1928) 2. Davidovich, 1957 - E.A.Davidovich "Numismaticheskie materiali  dlja hronologii i genealogii sredneaziatskih qarahanidov" in "Trudyi GIM", vol. 26, Moscow, 1957 3. Fedorov 2003 - M.N. Fedorov, "Qarakhanid coins in Tirmidh and  Balkh as a Historical source" in Numismatic Chronicle, 2003 4. Ibn Asir - Ibn Asir, "al-Kamil fi't-Tarih" (translating on Russian),  Tashkent, 2006. 5. Kochnev 1987 - B. Kochnev "Zametki po srednevekovoy  numismatike Sredney Asii", part. 8, in "Istorija materialnoy kulturi Uzbekistana" (IMKU), vol.21, Tashkent, 1987 6. Kochnev, 1997 - B.D. Kochnev "Svod nadpisej na karahanidskih  monetah", in book: Vostochnoe Istoricheskoe istochnikovedenie i special'nye istoricheskie discipliny, vol. 5, Moscow, 1997. 7. Kochnev 2006 - B. Kochnev "Numismaticheskaja Istorija  Qarahanidskogo qaganata (991-1209AD), part 1, Moscow, 2006 8. Shishkina 1964 - G.V. Shishkina "Klad monet s Afrasiaba" in  "Istorija materialnoy kulturi Uzbekistana" (IMKU), vol.5, Tashkent, 9. SNAT XVa - Michael Fedorov, Boris Kocnev (†), Golib Kurbanov,  Madeleine Voegeli, "Sylloge Numorum Arabicorum Tübingen, Buhara /Samarqand. XVa Mittelasien I, Berlin, 2008 10. ZENO - <https://www.zeno.ru>  The author may be contacted at ** **

## Table 1 Contents of the hoard Coin No. Titulature Epithet Mint Date ( AH ) Weight (g) Size (mm) **The first group of coins**
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl nu ṣ rat al-duny ā wa'l d ī n ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Rukn ī Samarqand 4.98
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a'zam ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mu'azzam ī Samarqand

| al-sulṭān al-'adl nuṣrat al-dunyā wa'l dīn ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Qadiri | Samarqand | 3.7 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- | ---: |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Mansuri | Samarqand | 4.57 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ibrahīm ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Mu'azzamī | Samarqand | 4.59 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ibrahīm ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Mu'azzamī | Samarqand | 4.19 |
| al-sulṭān  al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shāhī? | Samarqand | 4.67 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Burhānī | Samarqand | 5.76 |
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mansuri Samarqand 4.57
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ibrah ī m ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mu'azzam ī Samarqand 4.59
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ibrah ī m ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mu'azzam ī Samarqand 4.19
al-sul ṭā n  al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Sh ā h ī? Samarqand 4.67
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Burh ā n ī Samarqand 5.76

| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shahānshāhī | 3.75 |
|:--- |:--- | ---: |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shahānshāhī | 3.59 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shahānshāhī | 3.5 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shahānshāhī | 3.76 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shahānshāhī | 3.55 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Shahānshāhī | 4.38 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Sulṭānī? | 2.88 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl nuṣrat al-dunyā wa'l dīn sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Mubārakī | 4.14 |
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Shah ā nsh ā h ī 3.59
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Shah ā nsh ā h ī 3.5
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Shah ā nsh ā h ī 3.76
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Shah ā nsh ā h ī 3.55
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Shah ā nsh ā h ī 4.38
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Sul ṭā n ī? 2.88
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl nu ṣ rat al-duny ā wa'l d ī n sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mub ā rak ī 4.14
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl nu ṣ rat al-duny ā wa'l d ī n sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mub ā rak ī Samarqand 4.54

| al-sulṭān al-'adl nuṣrat al-dunyā wa'l dīn sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Mubārakī | 3.46 |
|:--- |:--- | ---: |
| al-sulṭān al-... al-mu'aẓẓam al-sulṭān al-salāṭīn al-nāṣir li-dīn allāh | Mu'azzamī | 4.01 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Muẓaffarī | 3.91 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Qarārī | 4.42 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl al-a'ẓam ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Qarārī | 4.71 |
| al-sulṭān al-'adl nuṣrat al-dunyā wa'l dīn ulugh sulṭān al-salāṭīn | Qādirī | 4.57 |
al-sul ṭā n al-... al-mu'a ẓẓ am al-sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n al-n āṣ ir li-d ī n all ā h Mu'azzam ī 4.01
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Mu ẓ affar ī 3.91
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Qar ā r ī 4.42
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl al-a' ẓ am ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Qar ā r ī 4.71
al-sul ṭā n al-'adl nu ṣ rat al-duny ā wa'l d ī n ulugh sul ṭā n al-sal āṭī n Q ā dir ī 4.57 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
# SOME UNUSUAL COINS OF RANBIR

**SINGH, DOGRA RULER OF KASHMIR** By Nicholas Rhodes

The coins of the Dogra rulers of Kashmir are generally rather uninspiring, being mainly anonymous silver and copper coins, struck at the Srinagar mint. They were first described by myself and Ken Wiggins in 1975 84, and little, if anything, has been written about them subsequently. However, two rare pieces have appeared which stand out as being of particular interest, and these pieces do raise some new points and some unanswered questions. *Fig. 1*

Obv:    *Sr* ī *Raganath J* ī *Saha'* ī *Zarb Sr* ī *nagar 1927 JHS*, with a pipal leaf at the top and an apparently redundant letter ' ī ' above the last line. Rev:      *Sr* ī *Ragha/natha J* ī *Saha Ja/rava Sr* ī *nagar* ī *, Sam 1927*. Diam: 22.2 mm, Wt.7.48 g.

Fig.1 is a machine-struck rupee dated VS 1927 ( AD 1870). The Persian script on the obverse seems to be of high quality, but the Dogra script on the reverse looks rather stilted, and totally different in style from the other Dogra coins, although the legend is the same. The redundant letter on the obverse also appears on the machine struck rupee dated VS 1929 which is in the British Museum collection and was published in our 1975 article. Clearly the dies of this new coin were not the product of a native Gurmukhi-speaking die engraver, but they are of good quality, and the striking is also of a high quality. The unanswered question is where was this piece struck?  The edge is plain and of even thickness, *c* 2 mm, so it does not look like the product of one of the main British-Indian mints, and it may have been struck by a private contractor in India, or even abroad. It is, of course, possible that it was in Kashmir, but at this date, the die-engravers were not familiar with the Gurmukhi script, which had never previously appeared on any coins in Kashmir. Although this type is listed in KM, as Y.16 85, it seems to be extremely rare and must have been struck in small numbers, either as a pattern, or as a presentation piece. The most likely explanation is that this is a pattern for the new light-weight coinage, as this was a period of change in the Kashmir coinage. For the two decades up to and including VS 1927, the Kashmir rupees of the Dogra rulers were called *Kham* rupees, which weighed about 10.5g, but were struck in debased silver and valued at about 8 British annas, implying a fineness of about 50% 86. In that year the Maharaja was probably pressurised by the British to strike fine silver coins, and decided that he would change the design, incorporate a Gurmukhi legend, and decrease the weight of the rupee, so that both new and old rupees could continue to circulate side by side. This machine84 N.G.Rhodes & K.W.wiggins, *ONS Inf. Sheet* No.11, April 1975. 85 The weight and denomination are listed in the original edition of KM as a rupee weighing 6.6-6.8 g; the denomination was reduced in error to ¼ rupee in the 4 th edition. This stated weight is probably an error as it is significantly lower than the weight of the only example seen by the author, which was bought from Steve Album, List 12, no.1385, in November 1978. The photograph in KM was supplied by the author many years ago.
86 Details on the names and relative value of the Dogra rupees in given by Walter B. Lawrence, *The Valley of Kashmir*, Henry Frowde, London, 1895, p.242.
struck coin is an early example of the new design with the date VS 1927, but the weight is too heavy for a fine silver coin, and the British would not have been happy with a coin of *c* 80% fine, which this weight would imply if the value was intended to be the same as the old *Kham* rupee. From then on, lighter and apparently finer silver coins were struck, called *Chilki* rupees. They could be easily distinguished from the old *Kham* rupees because of the cursive Gurmukhi script on the one side. The weight of the earliest such rupees, however, seems to have varied, with a few early pieces dated 1928 VS 87 weighing just under 6g, whereas others weigh just under 7g. The light coins tend to be slightly smaller, with a diameter of *c* 20mm, whereas the heavier pieces have a diameter of *c* 21.5 mm, but the design is identical. Clearly the heavier weight standard came to be regarded as normal, as the *Chilki* rupee was actually valued at 10 British annas, which would be appropriate for a sterling silver coin of the weight of *c* 7g, whereas the original intention may have been that the *Kham* and *Chilki* rupees would both circulate at the same 8 anna value. The two pieces illustrated below are typical of the coins described by KM as being struck on machine-punched planchets, but type 2a is of light weight, whereas 2b is of the heavier weight.  It can be noted that the letters IHS have been used on these particular examples, but no significance should be attached to this change, and the letters reverted to JHS during 1929 VS 88. *Type 2a - Wt 5.95g* *Fig. 2   Type 2b - Wt 6.98g* *Fig. 3* Diam: 14mm,  Wt. 2.32g

Fig.3  is a gold coin, weighing about 2.3g, or a third of the light Kashmir rupee of the time 89.  It is the only type of gold coin of the

87 I have not managed to weigh any examples dated VS 1927, so it is possible that the weight of all the *Chilki* rupees struck for normal circulation was *c* 6g in VS 1927, and was only increased to *c* 7g in VS 1928. An example with the date VS 1927 is illustrated in our 1975 article. 88 The meaning of these letters was discussed in our 1975 article, and they do represent the Christian phrase 'Jesus Hominum Salvator', 'Jesus, the saviour of mankind'. The letters were probably inserted, partly in an attempt to please the British, and partly in the hope that some of the good fortune that the British enjoyed might rub off on the Dogra rulers. 89 In KM (Ref Y.22), this coin is described as a ¼ mohur, but there is more tradition in this region for the striking of  ⅓ gold denominations rather than ---
examined and registered \[for office\] 110. \[The copper-smelting manufactory,\] directly subordinated 111 to the Currency Superintendency, is in charge of work on "copper-soaking" 112.

Confusion was caused by the last phrase, because its meaning remained incomprehensible. Then, another equally interesting paragraph was found in the *Yuan Shi,* referring to the day *wu-* *cheng* of the 3 rd moon of the 12 th year of the reign period *zhi-* *zheng* 113, which shed light on the meaning of the phrase "coppersoaking". The quote from the source and its translation are given below.

## 中書省臣言："張理獻言，饒州德興三處

，膽水浸鐵，可以成銅，宜即其地各立銅 冶場，直隸寳泉提舉司，宜以張理就為銅 冶場官。"從之。 114

The Minister of the Central Imperial Secretariat said: "Zhang Li advises \[next\]: in Raozhou, Dexing \[county\] in 3 places iron is soaking in vitriolic water 115, by which \[way\] it is possible to obtain copper. This should be followed and in all \[these\] areas to establish copper-smelting manufactories, directly subordinate to \[the relevant\] Currency Superintendency. Zhang Li should be appointed to the post of official \[in charge of the\] copper-smelting manufactory." \[Resolution by the Emperor\]: "To follow this."

110 銓注 *- quan zhu*, certification and registration of officialdom. See 漢語大詞典 Hanyu da cidian (Large dictionary of Chinese language). Version 2.0 of 2006, in the electronic dictionary ABBYY Lingvo 12, release 12.0.0.356. Xiao translates this term as "to judge the candidates and to enroll them for an appointment". See *Hsiao, Ch'i-Ch'ing* The military establishment of the Yuan dynasty.  Harvard East Asian Monographs; 77. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978, С. 91. Endicott-West, referring to Paul Ratchnevsky, translates it as "to be examined and registered for office". See Endicott-West, Elizabeth: Mongolian Rule in China: local administration in the Yuan Dynasty. Harvard-Yenching Institute Monograph Series; 29. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989, С. 68. The case in point is not about the system of public examinations, which, during Mongol rule, only began to function in AD 1315 (more details see in *S.Kuchera*. Nekotorye problemy ekzamenatsionnoi sistemy i obrazovaniya pri dinastii Yuan (Some problems of the examination system and education during the Yuan dynasty) // Kitai: gosudarstvo I obshchestvo. Moscow, 1977. P.73-92), but rather about certifications, the results of which  influenced promotion. Attestations of provincial officials were carried by provincial government (branch secretariat, *xing-sheng* ), for officials subordinated to Internal Territories ( 腹裏, Fu-Li - the area of the modern provinces of Shandong, Shanxi and Hebei. Often translated as Metropolitan Province), attestations were carried by the Ministry of personnel ( 吏部, *li-bu* ). See Yuan Shi, juan 82. Herbert Franke has translated the expression 流官内銓注 (see also note 18) as "welche in die normale Beförderungslaufbahn eingestuft waren" ( *Franke H.* Geld und Wirtschaft in China unter der Mongolen-Herrschaft. Beiträge zur Wirtschaftsgeschichte der Yüan-Zeit. Leipzig, 1949, S. 98.), i.e., «who are enrolled in a rank \[of officials\] with usual career development», which distorts the meaning, because it does not reflect the essence of the terms *liu-guan* and *quan-zhu*. 111 Franke translates this as "Das Münzamt von Tschi-li" ( *Ibid.* ), i.e. "Zhili Mint", but this is a mistake because, at that time, the province of Zhili did not exist and what should be used is the dictionary meaning of 直隸 - "to be in directly subordinate".

112 浸銅 *- jin-tong,* literally copper-soaking. Franke mistakenly translated the expression 掌浸銅事 as "verwaltete die Angelegenheiten der Einschmelzung (?) des Kupfers", i.e. "managed by copper smelting (?)", *Ibid*. 113 09.04.1352 AD 114 Yuan Shi, juan 42.

115 膽水 - *dan-shui*, old term for mine water, used in the copper smelting process and which contains copper sulphate. * *

A further search for information in Chinese dynastic histories quickly gave a positive result. It turned out that, in the above quote, the minister was talking about the hydrometallurgical method of extracting of copper from mine waters rich in dissolved copper sulphate 116. In other words, if iron is placed in a solution of copper sulphate (CuSO 4 ·5H 2 O), then the classical substitution reaction will take place in which iron ions replace the copper ions and pure copper will be obtained.

CuSO4 + Fe = FeSO4 + Cu The essence of this method is described in great detail in *Song* *Shi* 117. Below, is a quote from the source and its translation 118: 浸銅之法 ：以生鐵鍛成薄片，排置膽水槽中浸漬數 日，鐵片為膽水所薄，上生赤煤，取刮鐵 煤入爐，三煉成銅。大率用鐵二斤四兩， 得銅一斤。饒州興利場，信州鉛山場各有 歲額，所謂膽銅也。 The principle of "soaking copper" \<deposition of copper on a scrap of metal, immersed in cupriferous mine waters - *S.S.* \>: Cast iron is flattened into thin plates, then placed in vitriolic water to soak for several days. The iron plates in the vitriolic water become even thinner, their surface is covered with red bloom. The iron undergoes scraping; the scraped plaque goes to the smelting furnace. Triple melting produces copper of a good degree of refining. The maximum performance \[of the method\]: when using 2 *jin* *119* 4 *liang* *120* of iron, resulting in 1 *jin* of copper. Raozhou, manufactory Xingli, Xinzhou, manufactory Qianshan - each has prescribed an annual quota of \[production\] of so-called "vitriolic copper" \[i.e. copper which is extracted from the vitriolic water\]. The above information suggests that, in the Yuan Dynasty at least from AD 1352, copper was obtained by a hydrometallurgical method for casting coins in certain mints. Numismatists are well acquainted with varieties of 3 *wen* cash coins, dated 1352 and 1353, which differ sharply from the vast majority of coin issues made between AD 1350-1354 in their inferior calligraphy and quality of casting 121. Perhaps they were produced at one of the

116 Notes about obtaining copper by wet reaction can already be found at the beginning of the Western Han dynasty. However, at this time, this concept was not converted into technology which allowed any industrial application of it. The first description of the hydrometallurgical method of
obtaining of copper was written by Zhang Qian ( 張潛, AD 1025-1105) in
his discourse "Main records on copper soaking" ( 《 浸銅要錄 》 ). See 孙承平 Sun Chengping 《〈 浸铜要略 〉 序》的发现与剖析 «Jintong yaolüe » xu de faxian yu pouxi (Discovery and analysis of the "Introduction" to the "Short essay about copper soaking") // 《 中国科技史料 》 Zhongguo keji shiliao (Historical data of Chinese science and technology) 第24 卷第3 期 （2003 年 ） P.258.

117 宋史 Song Shi (Chronicle of the Song \[dynasty\]) ). Beijing, Zhonghua shuju, 北京：中華書局, 1985. See juan 180. 118 The author expresses his gratitude to Pavel Kartashov (Moscow) for advice on the chemistry of the process of extracting copper from mine water. 119 斤 - *jin*, weight unit. During the Yuan Period 1 *jin* was equivalent to 596.82 grams. See *Farquhar, David M.,* The Government of China..., P.443. 120 两 * - liang*, weight unit, equivalent to 1/16 *jin* (see note 28) or around 37.3 grams. *Ibid* *.* 121 For comparison: coins issued AD 1352 and 1353, with bad quality casting - ZENO Nos. 15627, 15628, 15487, 28324. Coins with good
piece for Palembang. This piece, illustrated on plate XXIII no. 216, is classified as an uncertain piece. However, on plate XXI under no. 173 in the section on  Cheribon, a Shi-dan piece is illustrated. Millies also mentions a pitis with the legends "Shi-dan" for the sultanate of Cheribon on the island of Java.  For this piece, illustrated on plate XV no. 121, the two characters on the right and left are  not read. The zeno database 131 illustrates a Shi-dan piece (ZN 5443) with the description "Malacca, local tin cash coin". Originally the legend was read as "Shi dian tong bao". As a result of my comments in may 2004, the reading was changed to "Shi-dan tong-bao" with the remark that "Shi-dan"  is simply a Chinese phonetic transcription comparable to the Chinese transcription "He-lan" as the name for Holland. Another example of such a transcription is the pitis that Millies illustrates on plate 15 as no. 122. The legends "Pang-lan" is considered a transcription of the  title "Pangeran". About two years ago a paper was published by Wang Yue Yang 132 in which he described pieces from Palembang with the inscription "Shi-dan li bao". Remarkably, he did not mention the pieces with the legend "Shi-dan tong bao". Recently, a number of Shi-dan pieces have been offered on eBay, firstly with the reading "Xian Ping", then with the reading "Shi-dan" and, most recently, with the reading "Shi li dan po". According to the seller, these pieces circulated in the Palembang region. The present paper is based on about 35 pieces from the author's own collection, data from eBay and the Zeno database, a total of about 70. A preliminary typology will be presented and their historical context will be discussed. In addition to the illustrations in this paper, other images can be found in the Zeno database. ** ** ***General description*** The pieces are rather thin and have a fragile appearance. They have the appearance of Chinese cash with a square central hole surrounded by 4 Chinese characters.  The obverse generally has a tiny outer border, but no border around the central square hole; whereas the reverse  is completely flat without borders. The majority of the pieces have the obverse legends "Shi-dan li-bao", but occasionally they have the legends "Shi-dan tong-bao" (see Fig. 1). The reverse  is blank without any legends. The characters "shi" and "dan" are always situated above and below the square hole, respectively, whereas the characters "li" or  "tong" and "bao" are situated to the right and left side of the hole. Occasionally, the position of the characters is reversed and then they should be read from left to right. The character "bao", although often corrupted, is always written in its complete form. Thus far, the abbreviated form as often seen on locally made cash pieces from Java 133 ' 134 has not been encountered, except for a piece in the Zeno database attributed to Malaysia.

| 131 | Illustrated in the Zeno database |
|:--- |:--- |
| http://www.zeno.ru/showphoto.php?photo=5443 |  |
| 132 | Wang Yue Yang, "Report on old coins from Old Harbor Palembang)", |
| Asia Numismatics 1 p34-36, 2008. |  |
| 133 | Yih,T.D. and J. de Kreek. "Typology of Javanese cash from the |
| Ethnographic Museum, Rotterdam", | ONS Newsletter 146, p.14, 1995 |
| 134 | Illustrated in a database on Chinese coins |
considerably. This is especially due to the variation in the diameter of the square hole. Popularly speaking some pieces appear to be more hole than coin. The right-hand column gives the ratio between the diameters of the piece and the hole. **Table 1 Mean metrical data**

**Weight** **(g)** **Diameter** **(mm)** **Thickness** **(mm)** **Diam.** **hole** **(mm)**

**Ratio:** **diameter/** **diameter** **hole**

| Mean | 0.61 | 18.3 | 0.6 | 6.8 | 2.7 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| S.D. | 0.18 | 1.2 | 0.1 | 0.8 | 0.4 |
| Range | 0.31-0.98 | 15.7-19.9 | 0.5-0.9 | 5.7-8.7 | 1.9-3.3 |

# S.D. 0.18 1.2 0.1 0.8 0.4

**Range** 0.31-0.98 15.7-19.9 0.5-0.9 5.7-8.7 1.9-3.3

# N

***Typology*** So far, two main types have been  found. In addition, for each main type, two subtypes can be distinguished, based on the position of the four characters surrounding the square hole (top, bottom, right, left), **Main type I:  Legends** ***Shi-dan li-bao*** - subtype I-1
Legends:  *Shi-dan li-bao* (26 pieces) - subtype I-2
Legends:  *Shi-dan bao-li*   (2 pieces) **Main type II: Legends** ***Shi-dan tong bao*** ** ** - subtype II-1a
Legends:  *Shi-dan tong-bao*  (1 piece) (complete  character "bao") - subtype II-1b
Legends:  *Shi-dan tong-bao*  (1 piece) (abbreviated character "bao") Apart from the differences used for the above classification, it should mentioned that this series of pieces is characterised by a high incidence of corruption in the Chinese characters. For instance, the character "li" consists of the radicals "he" and "dao" but the right radical "dao"  is often not or only partly present. **Discussion**

***Reading of legends*** Various readings have been proposed for the legends on these pieces. The reading "soutan" by Millies has already been mentioned in the introduction to this article. Another reading can be found in Stephanik's catalogue 135 on Coins from the Rijksmuseum, Leiden. It contains a note on the presence of 4 Chinese coins from Palembang, which are attributed to a certain Sultan Dipo. However,  in the existing list of Palembang sultans there is no one with the name  of  "Dipo". Furthermore, the position of the supposed two characters "Di" and "Po" on the pieces is in complete conflict with the traditional position of a name on cash coins. If it is indeed a name, it should be "Di" on top and "Po" either on the left or right side. In his most recent eBay auctions, the seller, Javaman691, gives the following explanation for the reading: "Shi Li" means "SRI" for the Chinese and "Dan Bo" is "tong bao" in Hakka Chinese. He does not give any additional explanation for the meaning of "SRI". The translation of "dan bo"as "tong bao", however, is rather difficult to reconcile with the occurrence of pieces with the legends "Shi dan tong bo".

135 J. Stephanik, *Munten van het Koninklijk Oudheidkundig Genootschap in* *het Rijksmuseum*. --- --- **Table 2  Individual metrical data**

|  | (mm) |
|:--- |:--- |
| Thickness |  |
|  | (mm) |
| # | (mm) |
| Inventory |  |
|  | code |

| 0.57 | 17.7 | 0.6 | 6.7 | SDY-1 | Shi-dan li?-bao |
| ---: | ---: | ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 0.41 | 16.6 | 0.7 | 8.2-6.9 | SDY-2 | Shi-dan x-bao |
| 0.33 | 16.2 | 0.7 | 8.1-7.6 | SDY-3 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.70 | 18.3 | 0.8 | 6.3 | SDY-4 | Shi-dan tong-bao |
| 0.98 | 19.8 | 0.7 | 7.4-6.5 | SDY-5 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.50 | 17.5 | 0.7 | 7.9 | SDY-6 | Shi-dan li?-bao |
| 0.48 | 18.2 | 0.6 | 8.6-8.4 | SDY-7 | Shi-dan bao li |
| 0.83 | 19.9 | 0.7 | 7.5 | SDY-8 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.31 | 16.3 | 0.5 | 8.4 | SDY-9 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.74 | 17.2-18.3 | 0.8 | 6.1 | SDY-10 | Shi-dan li-bao | 0.41 16.6 0.7 8.2-6.9 SDY-2 Shi-dan x-bao 0.33 16.2 0.7 8.1-7.6 SDY-3 Shi-dan li-bao 0.70 18.3 0.8 6.3 SDY-4 Shi-dan tong-bao 0.98 19.8 0.7 7.4-6.5 SDY-5 Shi-dan li-bao 0.50 17.5 0.7 7.9 SDY-6 Shi-dan li?-bao 0.48 18.2 0.6 8.6-8.4 SDY-7 Shi-dan bao li 0.83 19.9 0.7 7.5 SDY-8 Shi-dan li-bao 0.31 16.3 0.5 8.4 SDY-9 Shi-dan li-bao 0.74 17.2-18.3 0.8 6.1 SDY-10 Shi-dan li-bao

11a 0.75 16.3-17.7 0.9 6.5-7.5 SDY-11 Shi-dan li-bao\*\* 11aa Shi-dan li-bao\*\*

12a 1.25 19.2 1.2 5.6-6.4 SDY-12 Shi-dan li-bao\*\* 12aa Shi-dan li-bao\*\*

13a 1.05 19.2 1.1 5.8 SDY-13 Shi-dan li-lao\*\* 13aa Shi-dan bao-li\*\*

| 0.62 | 18.5 | 0.6 | 6.4-7.4 | SDY-14 | Shi-dan bao-li |
| ---: | ---: | ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 0.53 | 18.5 | 0.5 | 5.8-6.5 | SDY-15 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.80 | 18.9 | 0.7 | 6.3-7.2 | SDY-16 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.75 | 18.5 | 0.7 | 5.7-5.9 | SDY-17 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.83 | 19.3 | 0.8 | 5.9-6.4 | SDY-18 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.38 | 15.3-16.2 | 0.6 | 6.9-7.6 | SDY-19 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.31 | 15.7-16.4 | 0.5 | 6.5-7.1 | SDY-20 | Shi-dan li-bao\*\*\* |
| 0.50 | 18.9 | 0.7 | 6.4 | SDY-21 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.72 | 19.4 | 0.6 | 6.3 | SDY-22 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.71 | 18.6 | 0.7 | 5.7 | SDY-23 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.66 | 19.2 | 0.7 | 6.7 | SDY-24 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.46 | 18.4 | 0.6 | 5.9 | SDY-25 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.48 | 18.7 | 0.5 | 7.6 | SDY-26 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.43 | 17.4 | 0.7 | 8.7 | SDY-27 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.73 | 19.4 | 0.7 | 6.4 | SDY-28 | Shi-dan li-bao | 0.53 18.5 0.5 5.8-6.5 SDY-15 Shi-dan li-bao 0.80 18.9 0.7 6.3-7.2 SDY-16 Shi-dan li-bao 0.75 18.5 0.7 5.7-5.9 SDY-17 Shi-dan li-bao 0.83 19.3 0.8 5.9-6.4 SDY-18 Shi-dan li-bao

0.38 15.3-16.2 0.6 6.9-7.6 SDY-19 Shi-dan li-bao

0.31 15.7-16.4 0.5 6.5-7.1 SDY-20 Shi-dan li-bao\*\*\* 0.50 18.9 0.7 6.4 SDY-21 Shi-dan li-bao 0.72 19.4 0.6 6.3 SDY-22 Shi-dan li-bao 0.71 18.6 0.7 5.7 SDY-23 Shi-dan li-bao 0.66 19.2 0.7 6.7 SDY-24 Shi-dan li-bao 0.46 18.4 0.6 5.9 SDY-25 Shi-dan li-bao 0.48 18.7 0.5 7.6 SDY-26 Shi-dan li-bao 0.43 17.4 0.7 8.7 SDY-27 Shi-dan li-bao 0.73 19.4 0.7 6.4 SDY-28 Shi-dan li-bao SDY-29 Shi-dan li-bao SDY-30 Shi-dan li-bao

| 0.59 | 18.9 | 0.6 | 5.7-6.6 | SDY-31 | Shi-dan bao-li |
| ---: |:--- | ---: | ---: |:--- |:--- |
| 0.74 | 19.1 | 0.7 | 6.3 | SDY-32 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.87 | 18.3-18.9 | 0.9 | 6.4 | SDY-33 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.49 | 17.4-18.9 | 0.5 | 6.6 | SDY-34 | Shi-dan x-x |
| 0.77 | 19.5-20.0 | 0.7 | 6.5-7.6 | SDY-35 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.72 | 19.0 | 0.7 | 6.4 | SDY-36 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.51 | 18.7 | 0.6 | 5.9 | SDY-37 | Shi-dan li-bao | 0.74 19.1 0.7 6.3 SDY-32 Shi-dan li-bao 0.87 18.3-18.9 0.9 6.4 SDY-33 Shi-dan li-bao 0.49 17.4-18.9 0.5 6.6 SDY-34 Shi-dan x-x

0.77 19.5-20.0 0.7 6.5-7.6 SDY-35 Shi-dan li-bao 0.72 19.0 0.7 6.4 SDY-36 Shi-dan li-bao 0.51 18.7 0.6 5.9 SDY-37 Shi-dan li-bao --- SDZ-5443 Shi-dan tong-bao 0.40 16.5 SDE-1 Shi-dan x-x

| 0.55 | SDE-2 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| ---: |:--- |:--- |
| 0.55 | SDE-3 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.65 | SDE-4 | Shi-dan li-bao | 0.55 SDE-3 Shi-dan li-bao 0.65 SDE-4 Shi-dan li-bao 0.81 19.5 SDE-5 Shi-dan li-bao 0.50 16.5 SDE-6 Shi-dan x-x 0.64 SDE-7 Shi-dan li-bao 0.48 17.5 SDE-8 Shi-dan li-bao 0.65 18.5 SDE-9 Shi-dan li-bao 0.70 SDE-10 Shi-dan li-bao 0.62 18.5 SDE-11 Shi-dan li-bao

| 0.50 | SDE-12 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| ---: |:--- |:--- |
| 0.83 | SDE-13 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.76 | SDE-14 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.30 | SDE-15 | Shi-dan x-x |
| 0.61 | SDE-16 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 0.75 | SDE-17 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 17.7 | SDE-18 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 18.1 | SDE-20 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 19.0 | SDE-21 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 16.7 | SDE-22 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 18.3 | SDE-23 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 19.5 | SDE-24 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 18.8 | SDE-25 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 19.3 | SDE-26 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 19.5 | SDE-27 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 19.0 | SDE-28 | Shi-dan li-bao |
| 19.1 | SDE-29 | Shi-dan li-bao | 0.83 SDE-13 Shi-dan li-bao 0.76 SDE-14 Shi-dan li-bao 0.30 SDE-15 Shi-dan x-x 0.61 SDE-16 Shi-dan li-bao 0.75 SDE-17 Shi-dan li-bao 17.7 SDE-18 Shi-dan li-bao 18.1 SDE-20 Shi-dan li-bao 19.0 SDE-21 Shi-dan li-bao 16.7 SDE-22 Shi-dan li-bao 18.3 SDE-23 Shi-dan li-bao 19.5 SDE-24 Shi-dan li-bao 18.8 SDE-25 Shi-dan li-bao 19.3 SDE-26 Shi-dan li-bao 19.5 SDE-27 Shi-dan li-bao 19.0 SDE-28 Shi-dan li-bao 19.1 SDE-29 Shi-dan li-bao

# = 19.1diameter square hole; \* reading: top-bottom-right-left

\*\* pieces with their reverses stuck together  \*\*\* inner circle on obverse

## SDY; SDZ; SDE = pieces from author's collection, zeno database and eBay, respectively ** ** ** ** ** ** **More Members' News**

ONS member, Jens Jakobsson, has recently published *Alexanders Arvtagare: Historien om Grekerna i Mellanöstern och Indien* *(Alexander's heirs: the history of the Greeks in the Middle East and India).* In Swedish, but the author hopes to publish an English version some time in the future. Sekel Bokförlag, 240 pp; ISBN 978-91-85767-51-9 ** ** Numismatic auction activity in India is on the increase. Todywalla Auctions (<https://www.todyauction.com)> have been going for some time now, and Girish Veera has also been running Oswal Auctions (<https://www.oswalauctions.com).> Recently, Shatrughan Jain announced his first auction, details of which can be found at  <https://www.classicalnumismaticgallery.com> All this is an indication of a greater awareness of coin collecting as a worthwhile pursuit in India and the increasing buoyancy of the market there. In the past, Indian coins were usually undervalued in terms of their historical importance and, in many cases, rarity. This situation has been changing in recent years and continues to do so. We wish all involved every success for the future and hope that this will lead to the continuing publication of articles, papers and books on Indian numismatics. Certainly over the past 40 years, this has been a success story. When your editor began to collect Indian coins in the early 1970s, the available literature was very limited - some museum catalogues, JASB supplements, JNSI, Craig, Yeoman and Remick; since then, we have seen a dramatic increase in publications of all types on South Asian coinage - more, or certainly, more accessible, than for any other oriental series. Long may this continue!
# 

** ** ** ** **CONTENTS OF JOURNAL 204** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **

Page ONS News New members and revised addresses Other news

Reviews The standing caliph coins of Damascus: new die links - new questions, by Ingrid Schulze A new Abbasid  mint, by Yahya Jafar A hoard of silver-washed dirhams of Ibrah ī m, b. Ḥ usain Qarakhanid (secon half of 12 th century), by Anton Grachev Coinage of Ṭ oghril bin Sunqur, Salghurid At ā beg of F ā rs, by A. Akopyan & F Mosanef The minting of gold shauris in eighteenth century Georgia: monetary evidence, by Irakli Paghava A coin with Gandharan and Mauryan symbols, by Hans Loeschner A spate of new tooled forgeries of Kushan and P ā ratar ā ja coins, by Pankaj Tandon New discoveries and varieties in Gupta coinage, by Sanjeev Kumar Some unusual coins of Ranbir Singh, Dogra ruler of Kashmir, by Nicholas Rhodes A new mint for Indian princely states, Kotah & Jhalawar: "Qila' Shahabad", by Parveen Jain On one method of extracting copper for casting coins during the Yuan dynasty, by S.V. Sidorovich A new variety of Sikandar bin Ily ā s tanka, by SLG Tiny pitis inscribed "Shi-dan" (sultan) from Palembang, by T.D. Jih More members' news *** ***

* Pardy & Son (Printers), Ringwood, UK.     *