# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel Dr. M. B. Mitchiner

UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins Annual Subscription £4-00; H.FI1.18-00; 9-00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 67 August 1980 Members news

We are sorry to hear about the recent death of Major F. Pridmore whose name will be well known to many

members for his extensive studies dealing principally with the various British Colonial coin

series. Mr. S. Arumugam of, India writes as follows: As a member of the ONS, I would like to meet the

ONS members during their visits to South India to discuss

various subjects on South Indian Numismatics. They may have the opportunity to go through my collections

which comprise the following dynasties: 1, Chera: 2, Chola: 3, Pandya: 4, Pallava: 5, Vijayanagar: 6, Mysore:

7, Naiks of Madura and Tanjore: 8, East India Companies: 9, Satavahana: 10, Punch-marked etc.'

Mr. Robert Wynants of France, writes that he is investigating Far Eastern gift money (ie. Paper money

burnt at funerals, 'Hell Bank Notes', 'Heaven Bank Notes' etc.): he would welcome help from members. Mr.

- MacKenzie of New Jersey has sent information on the theft of an Ottoman coin collection in Greece and

has details for any member who may be able to assist.

The ONS Accounts for 1979/1980 are available from the Treasurer who will send a copy on receipt of an SAE. The next ONS meeting in London will be held at St. James' Hall, 6 Gloucester Terrace, W.2 on Saturday 8th. November at 2 pm.

Major Fred Pridmore an appreciation by Ken Wiggins

It is sad to have to report that one of the better known members of the O.N.S, Major Fred Pridmore of

Taunton, Somerset, died on the 6th. August last, aged 65 years. He had been in failing health for some time.

Major Pridmore was well known for his four major works on the coins of the British Commonwealth', two

other books on the coins of Cyprus and the Straits Settlements? and for his numerous contributions on many

aspects of Colonial and Commonwealth coinage which appeared in numismatic journals over many years.

The last of his works has just been published\* and it is fitting that he should have seen the results of his many

years of research before he died. Fred Pridmore was well known to a number of members of the O.N.S. and they will doubtless recall with

pleasure their visits to his home, where he was ever ready to discuss coins, to show them his magnificent collection amd with his wife Dora, to dispense generous hospitality. Although not strictly an Oriental Numismatist, Major Pridmore acquired an interest, and much expertise, in the coins of Malaya whilst he was

serving there. When posted to Aden he interested himself in the currency of the South Arabian Sultanates

and the Yemen and he was able to form a fine collection. His later interests extended to India when he commenced research on the coinage of the East India Company. Had he lived, it is doubtful if he would ever have given up his lifelong interest in numismatics, and it is sad to think that we shall not see any further

writings from Major Pridmore, who was noted for accuracy and meticulous attention to detail.

1.  The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations Part I. European Territories. Spink. 1960 Part II. Asian Territories. Spink. 1965 Part III. West Indies. Spink. 1966 PartIV. India (Volume I). East India Company: Presidency Series. Spink. 1975

2.  Modern Coins and Notes of Cyprus. Spink. 1972 Coins and Coinages of the Straits Settlements and British Malaya. Spink. 1968 3.  The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations PartIV. India (Volume II). East India Company, 1835 - 1858; Imperial India, 1858 - 1947. Spink 1980
Gold and silver Moghul coins of Kashmir by N. G. Rhodes

The Moghul coin series is very large and has not yet been covered in its entirety. Indeed, very few surveys

of any particular aspect of the series have been undertaken, with most published work being merely catalogues of collections. An exception is the 'Mint-Towns of the Mughal Emperors of India' by C. R. Singhal. That important work makes no mention of the period of issue of each mint within the reign of each Emperor and

does not give references so that readings can be checked. In order that the maximum economic and historical information may be gleaned from the coins it is important that the output of each mint be analysed fully. As a start towards such a task, I have made a list of all the dates of Moghul gold and silver coins of the Kashmir mint known to me.

The listing is based on published catalogues, together with a few unpublished coins in public and private collections. It is certainly not complete and I would welcome any additions. Small square silver coins in the names of Humayun and Akbar struck to the standard used by the earlier Sultans of Kashmir have not been included.

AKBAR AD 1556 - 1605: AH 963 - 1014 AV Mohur - - AH999(?): square: mint 'Kashmir'?  (PMC 151) AR Rupees - \_ Ilahi dates with month cited:  round: mint 'Srinagar' (Ilahi) (Month)

# N F

# Ro P P L N L © L L A 50 كط‎ Ro Li L Key to months: Farwardin Amardad Azar Ardibihisht Shahrewar Khurdad Mihr Bahman Tir Aban Isfandarmuz

JAHANGIR AD 1605 - 1628: AH 1014- 1037 AV Mohur - - AH 1034, Yr. 20: zodiacal sign 'Cancer' and couplet with the name of Nur Jehan: mint 'Kashmir' (R) AR Heavy Rupees NolTlahiyearormonth: mint 'Kashmir': weight ©. 13.6 gm

# F

# P

P AR Rupees - \_  WithIlahi yearand month: weight c. 11.4 gm (Ilahi) (Month) (Hijra: AH) (Yr.) #12 (Yr.)

## i

# Lg كلا,فل‎ L LN L N/L 1022/3 L BML L\_ BM L/A 1023/4 N L BM P / BM BM 1024/5

# A L B L P ب‎

# BM LS BM P BM / R N L BM /N 1027/8/9

# BM LS

# R

P AR Rupee - - AH 1029, yr. 15:  zodiacal sign 'Gemini' (IMC 696) AR 1/8 th. Rupee Un-dated: square: mint 'Khitta Kashmir' (White King, lot 3746)
# Po

SHAH JAHAN AD 1628 - 1658: AH 1037 - 1068 AV Mohur - - Square area xx/19 (IMCS) (Date both sides: BM) 1067/29 (Seaby Bull. 1, 1964) AR Rupee - - 1:  Inscription across field xx/4 Tir (L) 1041/4 Isfandarmuz (Ash) 1041/x Khurdad (BM) 1042/5 Amardad (Ash) xx/x Shahrewar (L) xx/x Aban (IMCS)

2: Square area xx/6 (BM) xx/12 (C) 1052/12 (L) xx/17 (L) 1055/18 (IMCS) 1059/21 (L) 1065/x (P) AR % Rupee - Nisar: xx/13 (Ash: same die as PMC 1453): Obv  غازى نثار شاه نايرج بادشاه‎ Rev صرب ربمشك‎ 1050/13 (BM): Obv. sb صا حب قران‎ yl Rev. press صرب‎ iw 1061/25 (BMC 671) xx/25 (BMC 672: Berlin)

# AURANGZEB 'ALAMGIR

AD 1658-1707: AH 1068-1118 AV Mohur - - xx/2  (N) AR Rupee - - xx/4  (IMCS) xx/10 $$ = (LS) $$ 1089/21 (LS) 1096/30 (IMCS) © 1099/32 (P) 1100/32 (BM) 1103/36 (BM) 1105/xx (P) 1106/39 (P) xx/45 (P) 1113/45 (A) 1115/47 (BM) 1115/48 (A) 1116/49 (P) 1117/50 (P)

# SHAH 'ALAM BAHADUR

AD 1707-1712: AH 1119-1124 AR Rupee - - xx/2  (P) xx/4 (L)

# JAHANDAR SHAH AD 1712: AH 1124 AR Rupee - - 1124/Ahd  (Ash)

# FARRUKHSIYAR

AD 1713-1719: AH 1124-1131 AV Mohur - - 1130/7  (PMC 2136) AR Rupee - - 1127/x  (IMCS)

MUHAMMAD SHAH AD 1719-1748: AH 1131-1161 AV Mohur xx/7 (BM) Ordinary type 1151/21 (A) 1154/24 (BMC 973) Special type AR Rupee - - xx/Ahd  (Schulman March 1914, lot 1183) xx/4 (R) © 1136/x (C) 1138/8 (BM) 1144/14 (Ash) xx/15 (UM 2380) xx/18 (G) xx/19 )2( 1159/29 (R) 1160/30 (BM)

AHMAD SHAH BAHADUR AD 1748 - 1754: AH 1161 - 1167 AV Mohur 1167/6 (BM: possibly a coin of Ahmad Shah Durrani published in PMC III) AR Rupee - - 1162/2  (P) xx/3 (BM) 1166/6 (BM)

"ALAMGIR II AD 1754-1759: AH 1167-1173 AR Rupee - - 1168/Ahd (BM)  1168/2 (Ash) 1169/2 (P) 1170/3 (R) 1171/3 (P) 1171/4 (BM) 1172/5 (BM) 1173/5 (BM) 1174/5 (P) AR 1/16th. Rupee - - 1169/2  (Ash) From 1176 onwards rupees were struck in the name of Ahmad Shah Durrani

Abbreviations: A American Numismatic Society, New York BM \_\_ British Museum C Indian Museum Calcutta, vol. III (H.N. Wright) IMCS Indian Museum Calcutta: suppl. (S. Ahmad) L\_Lukhnow Museum Catalogue LS Lukhnow Museum: suppl. (C.R. Singhal) Li - Lingen  N Central Museum Nagpur Catalogue

P Punjab Museum Lahore, vol. III R - G. Rhodes GS. Goron Ash Ashmolean Museum, Oxford Ro C.J. Rodgers, The square silver coins of the Sultans of Kashmir, JASB., 1885
Some recent publications Album, S., A further note on Tamerlane and Babar, Numismatics International Bull., July 1980, 210 - 212

Bailey, H. W., A kharostri inscription of Senavarman, king of Odi, J. Royal Asiatic Soc., 1980i, 20 - 29

(acknowledging the '"'Great King, King of Kings, Kuyula Kataphasa's son Sadaskano, the Devaputra'') Bertalanffy, F. D., The ten yen US Propaganda forgeries of the Pacific War, NI Bull., April 1980, 108 - 114 Briggs, D. G., Early writers on coins of Asia, NI Bull., May 1980, 134 - 137 & July 1980, 199 - 207

Campbell, I. C. G., Arabic Countermarks on the Anonymous Folles series, NI Bull., March 1980, 88 - 0 Campbell, I. C. G., Sethupati, NI Bull., June 1980, 169-177 Coin Hoards, Volume V, Royal Numismatic Society, London: includes details of numerous Oriental hoards Fisekcioglu, G., Turkish FAO Coins, NI Bull., April 1980, 103 - 107 Hennequin, G., Monnaies et Monnayages, Annales Islamologiques XV, 1979 MacKenzie, K. M., Suleyman II Manghirs, Spink's Numismatic Circular, July-Aug. 1980, 258 - 260

MacKenzie, K. M., Hejaz Railway Commemorative Medals..... and a related Firman, NI Bull., May 1980, 138

## Nercessian, Y. T., The Coronation Trams of Levon I, SNC. June 1980, 211 - 212

6© Plant, R., The coins of the Western Satraps, Seaby's Coin & Medal Bull., July 1980, 215 - 220

Rhodes, N. G. and Gabrisch, K., Two Sino-Tibetan coins, SNC., May 1980, 172 Sharma, I. K., Coinage of the Satavahana Empire, 1980: pp. 296, pl. XVII: available from K.P. Bagchi & Co.,

286 B B Ganguli St., Calcutta 700 012 (35 dollars) Stocking, R., An unlisted variety of the 1803 24 stivers of Ceylon, NI Bull., June 1980, 178

Westphal, H., Sur quleques monnaies Mameloukes frappées en Syrie, Annali (Ist. Ital. di Num., Roma), XXV

1978, 175-181 Wright, R. N. J., Chinese coin dies in the Birmingham mint and the Royal mint, SNC., May 1980, 173

Publications available from the Director, State Museum, Lucknow 226001, UP., India

(concluded from N/L no. 65) nos. 17-18,June- Dec. 1976: Rs.6. 00 Wahal, L. M., Asurvey of Ancient Coins in the District of Kanpur, pp. 11 - 15, pl. 1 Singh, O. P., Samkarsana, Vasudeva and Sarvamangala on coins, pp. 16 - 22, pl. 2

Khan, A. A., Inventory of medals and badges in the State Museum, Lucknow, pp. 40 - 58, pl. 2 Nazim, M., A new mint of a Bengal Sultan (Ruknabad, AR tankah of Fath Shah, AH 886), pp. 59 - 60 Srivastava, A. L., Coins of Prayaga Mandala, pp. 61 - 66

Yadav, R. D., Treasure Trove hoards of coins (Moghal AR, British India AR), pp. 93 - 99