# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel Dr. M. B. Mitchiner

UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins Annual Subscription 53-00: H.FI. 12-00; 6-00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 65 April 1980 Members news

Mr. Michael Broome would be interested in hearing details of Qajar gold tomans struck at Meshad mint

dated from AH 1260 to 1280. The next Occasional Paper will be by David Sellwood on 'Early Sassanian coinage and its background'. Dr. Henri Arroyo notes a further specimen of the?Sambak coinage (cfr. N/L 62 - 64). From his photograph it appears identical with Mr. Wiggins' coin illustrated in N/L 64 with the exception that the bottom line of the 'western' inscription reads ""CHO"' on the Wiggins coin and '"-HO"' on

the Arroyo coin (a horizontal bar in place of a letter C).

Remember the Rotterdam ONS meeting on Saturday May 10th. (Ethnological Museum). Another London

meeting will be arranged for the Autumn, details to be announced later. Some recent publications Papers

Ahmad, N., The coins of Purugupta, J. Numismatic Society of India, 1978, 111-115

Bhatt, S. K., Unknown Bengal coins of Bahadur Shah (Khizr Khan), Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 16-18 Bhatt, S. K., Sethi, P. K. and Holkar, R., Some unrecorded silver coins of Holkar State, Numismatic Digest,

Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 43 - 45 Bhattacharyya, P. K., Two interesting coins of Sasanka, J. Royal Asiatic Society, 1979 ii, 153 - 155

Campbell, I. C. G., The Annual Bulletins of the Turkish Numismatic Society, Numismatics International Bulletin, Feb. 1980, 55S
Cribb, J., An historical survey of the precious metal currencies of China, Numismatic Chronicle, 1979, 185 - 209 Dasgupta, K. K., Vayuvarma, a hitherto unknown king of Kausambi, JNSI., 1978, 96 - 97 Dhavalikar, M. K., A note on the Mandavas, JNSI., 1978, 101 - 103 Deyell, J. S., A hoard of Bharatpur silver coins, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 30 - 42 Farid, G. S., The markings on the coins of the Sultans of Bengal, - Numismatic Society of India, 1978, 27 - 33 Farid, G. S., A token of the period of the Sultans of Bengal, JNSI., 1978, 139

Ghosh, K., A new Murshidabad token in Victoria memorial collection, JNSI., 1978, 156 - 159 Gray, J. C. F., Tranquebar, Numismatics International Bulletin, Jan. 1980, 6 - 12 Gokhale, S., Three portrait coins of the Satavahana rulers, JNSI., 1978, 13 - 17 Gokhale, S., A unique coin of Mahakshatrapa Isvaradatta S 154, JNSI., 1978, 34 - 36 Gupta, M. L., A rare coin of Sultan Shams-ud-duniya wa'd din Abu al Muzaffar Daulat Shah of Bengal,

JNSI., 1978, 130 - 131 Gupta, P. L., A new coin of Jalaluddin Mahmud Shah of Bengal, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii

part i, 13-15 Handa, D., An interesting coin of Nasiruddin Khusrau, JNSI., 1978, 133 - 135

Hennequin, G., Fiducuaritéet fiscalité dans Islam mediéval: la rotation du monnayage de bronze, des surfrappes turcomanes au journal d'Ibu Iyas, Bull. de la Soc. Franc. de Numismatique, 1979 Jain, B., New hoards of Repousse gold coins, JNSI., 1978, 108 - 110

Kumar, M., An interesting Vrishni sealing from Sunet, JNSI., 1978, 87-91 Kumar, M. and Gupta, H. R., Some interesting Yaudheya coins from Assandh (Haryana), JNSI., 1978, 94

van Laere, R., Circular coinage of the Maldive Islands, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii, part i, 48 - 57

van Laere, R., Le Monnayage des Iles Maldives, Rev. Belge de la Numismatique, CXXIV, 1978, 181 - 184. Lahiri, A. N., The importance of the unique gold coin of Naranarayana, JNSI., 1978, 140 - 143 Lingen, J., Rupees with the mint name Arkat, Seaby's Coin & Medal Bulletin, Jan. 1980, 13 - 15 Lingen, J., Awadh medal of Queen Nawab Tajmahal, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 61 Maheshwari, K. K.,\_ A new portrait coin of Yajna Satakarni, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i,

1-3 Maheshwari, K. K., Some interesting Mughal coins, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 19 - 21 Mani, B. R., Determining the type and substantival attribution of Kadasa coins, JNSI, 1978, 9 - 12 Mirashi,\_ -  iP Coin evidence for Traikutaka rule in Vidarbha, ibid, - - Mehta, R. N. and Momin, K. N., Deva hoard of Kshatrapa coins, JNSI., 1978, 18 - 26 Mirashi, V. V., The date of Mahakshatrapa Isvaradatta, JNSI., 1978, 37 - 41 Mishra, M., A new Kali-Radha-Krishna token, JNSI., 1978, 164 - 165 Mitchiner, M. B., Some South Indian Gold Fanams, Numismatic Digest, Numismatic Soc. of Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 26 - 28 Mukherjee, 8, N., A note on some Yaudheya coins, JNSI., 1978, 92 - 3 Niyogi, R., A unique coin from Bengal and a review of \*Iwad's career, JNSI., 1978, 42 - 52 Ota, S. B., Origin and history of Rama-tankas, JNSI., 1978, 160 - 163

Phukan, J. N., On the Ahom name of Kamalesvara Simha, JNSI., 1978, 153 - 154 Rebello, F., 5. Thome of the reign of Filipe II, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 29 Saenz, J. I., Murcia: Ano 649 de la Hejira, Dinar inedito, Cuadernos de Numismatica, VIII, Enero 1979, 20-21 Salomon, R., Observations on the Ranjangaon hoard, JNSI., 1978, 106 - 107 Shastri, A. M., Vidarbha and the Traikutakas, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 7 - 9 Srimali, K. M., Two unpublished coins of Vangapala of Panchala, JNSI., 1978, 98 - 100 Shastri, A. M., Coins of Simhendrapala, a hitherto unknown king of Central India, JNSI., 1978, 128 - 129 Siddiqui, A. H., New coin varieties of Mahmud Shah Bahmani, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i,

22 - 25 Singh, J. P., On the initial Ahom coinage, Spink's NC.,, Jan. 1980, 5 Singh, J. P., The Bird or the Bird god on the coins of Gadadhara Simha, JNSI., 1978, 144 - 148 Sircar, D. C., Gold coin of Naladeva, Numismatic Digest, Bombay, 1979, iii part i, 10 - 12

Tripathy, S., New finds of Ganga fanams, JNSI., 1978, 120 - 126

Valdettaro, C., New Punch-marked coins from Manipur, JNSI., 1978, 82 - 85 Wiggins, K. W., Tokens imitating coins of Awadh and other states, JNSI., 1978, 53 - 78 -

Wiggins, K. W., Sikh gold rupees, JNSI., 1978, 155 Williams, D. J., New variety of Sudanese minor coins, NI. Bull., Feb. 1980, 57 Wischmann, H., A 20 para piece, Egypt 1222, of Mustapha IV, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Feb. 1980, 47 Wittmann, C., The gold coins of the Chaulukyas of Gujarat: a reappraisal, JNSI., 1978, 116 --- Books

Hennequin, G. and Abu - \| - Faraj, Al 'Ush, Les monnaies de Balis, Institut Francais de Damas, Damascus 1978, pp. xi+ 113, pl. 11.

Mitchiner, Michael, Oriental Coins and their Values: III: Non-Islamic States and Western Colonies, AD 600 -

1979: pp. 640,. over 4,750 coins catalogued in their historical context, valued and all illustrated. This

is now available from B. A. Seaby Ltd., 11 Margaret Street, London, case bound, price £38. It completes the three - volume survey of Oriental Numismatics.

Publications available from the Director, State Museum, Lucknow 226001, UP., India: ~- This list has been supplied by John Deyell who notes that postage costs from Rs. 40.00 to 60.00, depending

on the size of order, for sea mail (Rs. 125 - 150 extra by air) and takes about 6 months to Europe or North America.

Singhal, C. R., Supplementary Catalogue of Mughal coins in the State Museum, Lucknow. 1965 (re-issued with errata, 1979). pp. 167, pl. 16, plus mint notes, table of ornaments. Rs. 20. 00

Srivastava, A. K., Catalogue of Indo-Greek coins in the State Museum, Lucknow. 1969, pp. 46, pl. 7, plus

5 plates of drawings, table of monograms, tables of Greek and Karosthi inscr. Rs. 9. 72

Srivastava, A. K., Catalogue of Saka - Pahlava coins of Northern India in Lucknow Museum. 1972, pl. 7 of © photos., pl. 8 of drawings, table of mgr., tables of Greek and Karosthi inscr. Rs. 16. 00

the following Bulletins of Museums and Archeology in U.P.

no. 3, Dec. 1969: Rs. 3.00 Srivastava, C. S., Kusana hoards of Treasure Trove coins from Uttar Pradesh (1941 - 42 to 1969 - 70), pp. 48 - 67.

no. 4, Dec. 1969: Rs.3.00 Srivastava, A. K., A hoard of Kusana Gold coins from Jaunpur, pp. 27 - 30, pl. 6 Srivastava, ) S., Treasure Trove hoard (Moghul copper), pp. 68 - 74

nos. 5 - 6, June - Dec. 1970: Rs.6.00 Srivastava, A. K., Kushana Gold coins from Unnao District, pp. 31 - 33, pl. 2 Srivastava, K. P., Coinage system in the province of Banares from 1734 - 1879 AD, pp. 71 - 77 no.7,June 1971: Rs.3-.00 Srivastava, C. S., Treasure Trove hoards (Delhi Sultans billon and silver, late Moghul silver), pp. 66 - 70 no. 8, Dec. 1971: Rs.3.00 Srivastava, A. K., Findspots of Kushana coins in ULP., pp. 37 - 43 Srivastava, C. S., Treasure Trove hoard (early Moghul copper and silver), pp. 78 - 84

no. 10, Dec. 1972: Rs. 3.00 Se Srivastava, A. K., A note on the coins of Samanta Deva, pp. 45 - 48, pl. 1 Srivastava, C. S., A rare rupee of Shah 'Alam I Bahadur (Couplet type of Multan, 11 19/ahd), pp. 72 - 73 Srivastava, C. S., Treasure Trove hoards (Kalachuri gold, Native state silver), pp. 74 - 76 nos. 11 - 12, June - Dec. 1973: Rs. 3.00 Srivastava, A. K., Mathura as known through the coins, pp. 30 - 36 Srivastava, A. K., Treasure Trove hoards from Mathura District (Kushana AE, late Moghul AR), pp. 37 -41 no. 14, Dec. 1974: Rs. 3.00

Mukherjee, B. N., A note on the attribution of some Kushana coins, pp. 1 - 4, pl. 1 Srivastava, A. L., Srivatsa symbol on early Indian coins, pp. 5 - 13, pl. 1

Srivastava, C. S., Treasure Trove hoards of coins (Indo-sassanian 81., Nagas of Narwar, AE, Delhi Sultans

Bl. & AR, late Moghul AR, Native States AR, British India AR), pp. 60 - 70

nos. 15 - 16, June - Dec. 1975: 5. 6. 00 Shastri, A. M., Adyavadhi ajnat Kausambi-naresh vijaya-nandi ke sikke (Till now unknown coins of the

Kausambi king Vijayanandi), pp. 25 - 31, pl. 1 Mukherjee, D., Salabhanjika motif on coins, pp. 32 - 34, pl. 1

Chaturvedi, S. N., Adi Varaha coins - a cultural interpretation, pp. 75 - 81, pl. 1 Srivastava, A. L., Some interesting Rama-tankas in the collection of the State Museum, Lucknow, pp. 82 - 85, pl. 1 Yadav, R. D., Treasure Trove hoards of coins (AR punch-marked, Mughal AR, British India AV), pp. 109-113 (to be continued)
A mysterious mint of the Nawabs of Arcot by K. W. Wiggins A recently examined lot of Indian copper coins contained 28 pieces of distinctive fabric and style which were recognised as paisa of the Nawabs of Arcot. The majority were crudely struck and well worn, thereby meriting no great attention. However, a closer examination of this group revealed the interesting fact that they bore a

mint name which is not one of the known minting places in the Carnatic.

## The following composite drawing was made by using most of the specimens in the group

Average weight: 181 grains (11.72 gm) © ) Average diameter: 18 mm. ماعاش‎ oleae ا‎ 2 Gite (سابة) 59 و‎ Obv. Sikka zad bar haft kashur (seeah) SEIUZ (wASIEAES 7 faizal ilah hami (din) (Muhammad) سل ويل‎ a از تور رار درل‎ rs) اك‎ Shah Alam (Badshah) bihegira.... rw /y) وا‎ Rev. Zarb Muazimabad du sanah..... & "da A 12 ارت‎ 4,2 Walajah مو اراز‎ \> Libs

The obverse legend appears to be an abbreviated form of the usual Shah Alam distich; there is certainly no trace of some of the words. The reverse lacks the usual Jalus maimanat manus formula.

These coins were published previously by the late C. H. Biddulph (JNSI. XXIV, 1962, 21. V, nos. 11-12). Biddulph listed them under the Arcot mint, but commented in the text that 'whilst no definite evidence exists as to the mint from which coins A and B were issued it is permissable to hazard a guess that it was Arcot'. I have been unable to trace any town by the name of Muazimabad within the region formerly under the control of the Nawabs of Arcot, but the name itself may merely be an honorific, as Muazimabad means

'the eminent city'. It would, however, appear not to be Arcot, as copper coins of a somewhat different type and of better workmanship were issued with the mint name Arcot contemporaneously with the Muazimabad pieces.

The following dates and regnal years have been observed on the coins of this group: - RY 3, AH 1178/RY 5, AH 118x/RY 8, AH 1183/RY 10, RY 12, RY 15, AH 119x/RY 17, RY 18, AH 1192/RY 19, AH 1202/RY 25 (sic), AH 1203, AH 1209/RY 29, RY 38.

An East India Company weight for Farrukhabad rupees of AD 1806 - 1818 by Michael Mitchiner The weight published here is a uniface copper piece that has been machine struck with a marginal collar. The inscription within a hexagonal frame on the obverse is as follows: -

Minimum legal weight of oblique milled old Fur. Rupee 171.198 grs. beneath the inscription is stamped an authorisation monogram that appears to read - JC.

The oblique milled Farrukhabad rupee was authorised on 27 th. March 1806 at a weight of 173 grains (Pridmore'.م‎ 222). Its production in the Bengal Presidency continued until a new form of Farrukhabad rupee was introduced in 1819 at a weight of 180.234 grains.

Although there exists a substantial body of evidence concerning the authorised weights of various coin denominations struck by the East India Company, much less appears to be known about the accepted tolerance in weight. The coin weight published here is of particular interest because it defines the acceptable

weight tolerance: a mere One per cent. It so happens that the Farrukhabad silver coinage provides one of the few instances in which there is also documentary evidence concerning weight tolerance. Pridmore notes that the official "allowance for wear" on the oblique milled Farrukhabad rupees was "6 annas weight" and for the succeeding class of rupees was "1 %''. The sources correlate and the inscription on the coin weight would seem to show that the documented tolerance was actually put into practice.

- Pridmore, The coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations, part IV India, vol. 1. East India Company

Presidency series c. 1642 - 1835.