# February 1990

**ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY ** **OCCASIONAL PAPER No. 24 **

**Hijri/Regnal Year Combinations on Mughal Coins ** **A. S. DeShazo **

One of the more frustrating factors that complicate the study of Mughal coins is the misread dates recorded from coins in the literature. The numerical cyphers that make up the coin dates are sometimes ambiguously engraved, and one cannot always determine whether a "3" (h^ ) or a "4" (^^^ ) is intended, or a "6" ( ) or a "7" ( ), when the forms rendered on the coins appear to be r and * Y* respectively. Mughal coins are usually smaller in diameter than their dies, and date elements that are partially off the flan give rise to misreadings. The right hand portion of a "3" ( * ^ )* being off the coin and thus appearing to be a "2" (^^ ) is a classic example.

The vast majority of misreadings could be avoided if the coins are regarded within the context of the dates that normally would be expected, particularly with regard to the combination of the hijri and regnal years on the specimens under study. To provide such a context, tables of the normal combinations are given below.

Beginning with Jahangir, Mughal coin dies were made with both a hijri year and a regnal year, usually with one on the opposite face of the coin from the other. The early coins of Jahangir from Ahmadabad vary from this arrangement and in other respects as well, but a special section on Ahmadabad is included to deal with those exceptions.

Regnal years were the measure of the length of the emperors' reigns. These years were counted from the day of the individual emperor's official enthronement * (julus), * which was different in a number of cases from the actual day of enthronement, and advanced on the anniversary of that official day. Sometimes, at the beginning of a disputed succession, coins were struck with date combinations which reflect the local recognition of a new emperor. Aurangzeb, whose official enthronement was considered to be in A.H. 1068, had coins struck at some mints with regnal year one combined with A.n.1069 and 1070, which implies that he was recognized locally in A.H.1069 and not 1068. Even so, these same mints soon produced coins combining A.H.1070 with regnal  years 2 and 3, thus demonstrating that their chronology had been brought into line with the official accession date of A.H.1068. Shah 'Alam Bahadur decreed an official enthronement date that fell in A.H.1118 as befitted the legitimate successor of Aurangzeb who had died near the end of A.H.1118. However, Shah 'Alam Bahadur did not gain real power until the beginning of A.H.1119, and as a consequence, his coins are found with regnal year one dated A.H.1119 but not 1118.

Occasionally, perfectly legitimate and correctly read coins will bear a date combination not given in my tables. This is due to the carrying over of a die from a previous year that still had useful life and was considered to be too valuable to waste. In nearly every case, if not all, it is the die with the hijri year that has been carried over. At the governmental level, the die having the regnal year was considered the more important for fiscal control reasons, and so it was mandatory that coins bore the correct regnal year. By the end of the Mughal rule, there was a system practiced in the marketplace in which coins, not of the current regnal year, were discounted to a value less than those of the current year. It is significant that the British found it necessary to freeze the regnal year on coins struck under their authority in an attempt to combat the pernicious practice. All of which serves to demonstrate the primacy of the regnal year in determining the true year of an issue. - * ••' * The llahi years on Akbar's coins were not in an identical sense the same as the regnal years of his successors. Also, llahi years supplanted hijri years for the latter part of Akbar's reign and did not appear simultaneously with them on the same coins. Naturally a table for Akbar is not needed, however since the llahi year 50 made a brief appearance at the beginning of Jahangir's reign on the Ahmadabad coins, a short description of that era is desirable. The llahi era was instituted in A.H.992 but was
calculated from the * Nauroz* (solar new year's day) in Akbar's accession year, A.H.963. Since this was done in retrospect, the earliest date of this era on coins was year 29. The llahi years were calculated on a solar calendar of 365+ days. Hodivala has already shown that the regnal years of Jahangir were also in the solar calendar, but those of Shah Jahan were on a lunar calendar of 354+ days, despite the presence of the names of solar llahi months on many of the very same coins. The word llahi on the coins of Jahangir and Shah Jahan refers solely to the month named and not the year. All of Jahangir's successors used lunar regnal years which were calculated from their respective official accession dates.

One still must be on guard for coins that have mismatched hijri and regnal years that were products of contemporary forgers. Generally, the low weight and/or poor style of the engraving, betray the true nature of these pieces.

There are surviving coins in the name of Aurangzeb from mints such as Golkonda with dates mismatched due to the freezing of one or other of the date elements, but these are local rather than Mughal issues.

The tables which are the focus of this paper are virtually self explanatory, but two examples may help to clear any obscurity. Referring to Aurangzeb's table, the year A.H.1088 is adjacent to regnal years 20 and 21. This means that the earlier part of A.H.I088 fell in regnal year 20 and the latter part into year 21. The table can be read right to left as well, if Jahangir's table is consulted, regnal year 5 is opposite A.H.1019 and adjacent to A.H.1018 and 1020. This means that almost the whole of A.H.1019 fell in regnal year 5, but since regnal 5 is a solar year and longer than the lunar hijri year by about 11 or 12 days, a few days of it fell into both A.H.1018 and 1020.

These tables should not be considered a collector's check list as not all listed date combinations exist. This is particularly true for the reign of the last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah II. The tables are valid for all the regular Mughal mints but for the exceptions noted elsewhere in this paper. Jahangir 101? & Shah Jahan Shah 1041 Jahan Aurangzeb,^> -c^> Aurangzeb 1098 ^J **ITf** **,** ** •• \< f** ** i-i' ** SJ;iah 3^ 37 - 5 -m. ^3 ^5 46 ~, •\*Alam Bahadur

# ' V\*» --- Farrukhsiyar

Ahmad Shah Bahadur Shah 'Alam II Muhammad Akbar II Muhammad Shah 'Alamgir II Shah 'Alam II 3^ Muhammad Akbar II Bahadur Shah II

# AHMADABAD

The mint of Ahmadabad provides a number of exceptions to the general rules discussed above as they pertain to the reign of Jahangir. At the beginning of the reign, the llahi year 50 was continued for a few months as an extension from the reign of his father Akbar, which implies that the Ahmadabad officials regarded the llahi reckoning as an ongoing system rather than an enumeration of regnal years.

Unlike other mints, coins for this mint are found with the hijri/regnal year combination 1019/6, but this was due to the variant dating employed there, calculated as it was from Jahangir's * julus* instead of the * Nauroz* as all of the other mints did.
Appended below is a table specially constructed for the pertinent run of Jahangir's issues from Ahmadabad. Despite some issues being missing, at least to my knowledge, enough have survived to show that at this mint, regnal years were counted from the enthronement date in the llahi month of Aban (the month of Akbar's death) until Jahangir's 7th regnal year. Sometime during the course of this year, the mint officials were obliged to recognize that their coins were out of step with the other mints. To remedy the difference, after the usual 12 months of the regnal year expired, year 7 was continued an additional four and a fraction months so as to end on the last day of the regular solar calendar. In this way, regnal year 8 then could commence on 1 Farwardin, the first day of the new solar year. It was only at this moment that Ahmadabad came into line with the other mints in this reign. AHMADABAD - only

Date elements in brackets have not been confirmed on coins. (Amardad) Shahrewar Mihr Aban Azar Di (Bahman) (Isfandarmuz (Farwardin) (7)(1021) (7)(1021) (7)(1021) '(7)(1022) (8)(1022) (Ardibihisht)(8)(1022) (Khurdad) Tir (Amardad) (Shahrewar) Mihr Aban Azar Di (8)(1022) 8 1022 (8)(1022) (8)(1022) 8 1022 8 1022 8 1022 8 1022

# REFERENCES

Hodivala, Sh. H., * Historical Studies in Mughal* * Numismatics,* The Numismatic Society of India, reprinted 1976. \*"' Rode, V. P., * Catalogue of Coins in the Central Museum* * Nagpur,* * Coins of the Mughal Emperors,* Part I, Bombay 1969. Whitehead, R. B., * Catalogue of Coins in the Lahore Museum, Lahore,* Vol. II * Coins of the Mughal* * Emperors, * Lahore reprinted March 1977. Wright, H. N., * Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum Calcutta,* Vol. Ill * Mughal Emperors of India, * Varanasi reprinted 1972.

-..,. - < > Postscript " ', '. / » \* - tr-  '-

Indian numismatics and Mughal numismatics in particular owe a great deal to Sh. H. Hodivala. The idea for this paper and for much of its substance is to be credited to his work.

I would like to acknowledge the assistance of Stephen Album and William B. Warden, Jr. Dr Michael L. Bates was most helpful and comments from him on my original draft are much appreciated. However, any faults are mine only.

My research on the hijri/regnal year combinations on early Durrani coins has reached an advanced stage, but more data would be helpful. I would greatly appreciate being informed of Durrani coins of any mint with date combinations not given in the standard references. To be of use, both hijri and regnal years must be present and unambiguously clear. The written confirmation by contributors ordinarily will be sufficient, but in the case of controversial dates, a photograph may be requested. Acknowledgement of contributors will be gratefully given upon publication except where expressly not desired.

- O. Box 8786  Metairie, Louisiana 70011 ' ' ' \* - ' USA.

Av 6 1020 ^^^^ (7)(1020) Azar 7 1020 (Di) (7)(1020) (Bahman) (7)(1020)

7 1020 Isfandarmuz (7)(1021) Farwardin 7 1021 (Ardibihisht)(7)(1021) Khurdad 7 1021 (Tir) (7)(1021)