# Occ. I^Jber

BOOKS IN PRINT - EAST ASIM ITUMISMATICS //Ö./V

Following our listing of Arabic books available, Pat Hogan has now produced a companion list covering numismatic books on the Par East. All books are currently available from stock in the U.S.A. and, where sterling prices are shown, also in the U.K. If you have dif Lculty in obtaining them from your usual sources, ONS may be able to help you. Please let me know of any errors or omissions.

General: Coole, A.B. Coins in China's History, 4th ed. S8.75.£3.25. Su2rveys all Chinese coins and relates their issue to Chinese and western historical events. China, Cresswell O.D. Chinese Cash £1.50 general cast Pocket sized listing - see review with October '71 issues: Newsletter.

Coole: Encyclopedia of Chinese Coins, Vol.1. Bibliography of Par Eastern Numismatology and a Coins Index El 4.75. £5.25. Coole: Vol. 2, The Early Coins of the Chou Dynasty IL20. £8.50 Deals with cowries and over 2000 different types of hoi''ow-handled spade money. Coole: Vol. 3, Spade Coin Types of the Chou Dynasty 120.£8.50 Remmelts A.A. Chinesische Kaschmunzen £1.25. Pocket sized listing in German - see review with October

'71 Newsletter. Patalas ¥. Chinesische Munzen von ihren Ursprung bis 1912

a.7.50 Good general description in German Ting Pu-pao: Li Tai Ku Ch'ien T'u Shuo (A Catalog of

Ancient Chinese Coins) 3-6.00 (Chinese text) 2nd edition. Thousands of coin-rubbings including pieces from Japan, Korea and Annam. Schjoth/Hancock: Chinese Currency S12.50. £6.25. Schjoth's catalogue of Far Eastern coins in Oslo Museum amended by Virgil Hancock. Remmelts A.A. Chinese Charras and Amulets 3.5.00 China, struck Kann E. Jllustrated Catalog of Chinese coins (Gold, Silver, series: Nickel an^ Aluminitim) 2L 25.00. Note this excludes copper and brass coins, but has much valuable general information. Woodward A.M.T. The Minted Ten-Cash Coins of China Ï7.50. Reprint - includes all then-known die varieties of these coins. Chinese Mao K.Ö. History of Chinese Paper Currency, Vol. I. £10,00. paper money: Illustrated Cat. of Bank Notes Issued by the Central Bank

of China. Vol. 2, The People's Republic of China from 1921-1965.a 12.00.

Smith W.D. & Matravers B. Chinese Banknotes 215.00. Annam: Novak J.A. A Working Aid for Collectors of Annamese Coins

E5.50. Lists all known Annamese coins and copies. Japan: Jacobs and Vermeule. Japanese Coinage, rev'd ed. SIO. £4.50. Central Government issues only of Japan, Manchuluo \<& Korea. --- Japan: (Cont'd) Korea: Philijpines: Tibet: Siam: Hong Kong: East Indies Malaya: Neth: Indonesia:

J.A.N.A. Catalog of Japanese Coins (in Japa\]iese) - post 1870 coins with mintages and values, also  earlier paper money, and gold and silver pieces. Mandel E.J. Cast Coins of Korea S7.50. £3.50. Covers the period 996-1891 and includes a Korean numismatic dictionary. Mandel E.J. Trial Listing of Korean Charms & Amulets.

Basso A. Coins, Medals and Tokens of the Philippines

25.95. £3.50 Shafer Neil. A auide Book of Philippine Paper Money 22.00 Kempf P. A Primary Report on Native Tibetan Coins 22.00 Le May. Coinage of Siam 27.50. £1.75 reprint. Little S. Bank Notes of Thailand 2 5.00. De Sousa Standard Catalog of Hong Kong Coins and Currency Notes. 22.50.

Pridmore P. Coins and Coinages of the Straits Settlements and British Malaya £2.10.

Scholten C. The Coins of the Dutch Overseas Territories 212.50 Originally written in Dutch - contains much useful material for the period 1601-1948.

Foltz. Paper Money of the Republic of Indonesia 22.00.