# ORIENTAL mBCTSMATIC SOCIETY JUME 1973 OCCASIONAL PAPER No.8

CHINA- Provinces of Pukien & TaiwanRe-assessment of the Work of the Foochow Mint on the Silver Coinage. 1896 - 1906. hy R. Wright. / ••

General acceptance of the theory that the Taiwanese silver coinage of "c 1890-2" was produced at the Eoochow Arsenal is puzzling, considering that the Pukienese silver coinage was not apparently produced by the same mint until 1898. After following up a set of Pukien 20, 10 and 5 cent pieces donated to the Royal Mint Collection in 1898, it is equally perplexing to find these coins to he of the type normally dated "c 1902", (K.128, 129, 131).

Close inspection of the works of the authorities Kann, Kalgan Shih, Tsiang, Wayte-Raymond and Su (1) reveals the maximum contradiction on the subject and the perpetuation of two errors. Firstly, the occasional dating of the Taiwanese silver coinage to as far hack as 1886 is clearly due to a misinterpretation of a statement by Tsiang, when he writes: "As Formosa was a province of China in the 1 2th Year of Kuang Hsu, silver coins were is-sued in that territory". Secondly, the Imperial Maritime Customs Decennial Reports, which are usually quoted as source material for Chinese numismatics, were actually a precis of the annual reports; a false trail was laid when the report for Foochow for 1892-1901 baldly, albeit correctly, stated that a new mint for coinage of 20, 10 and 5 cents was opened in 1900 - but omitted any reference to past ac+ivities. The result has been a certain legitimate confusion ever since. However, by making use of the mater-^al contained in the IMC annual reports, the China Coast newspapers, the Commercial Reports produced annually by Her Britannic Majesty's Consuls (and here we were fortunate in having a Consul at Foochowand one in\*:erested enough to arrange a visit to the mint) and finally the accession dates of the coins contained in the Royal Mint and British Museum collections, a rather more coherent picture can be obtained; although inevitably some questions are left unanswered.

Looking briefly at the early silver coinage nf Pukien and Taiwan - all of which are undated - they can be grouped as follows (some type letters have been added for easier reference in this paper):- Pukien

"c 1898" Y.I 02-5 5c 10c, 20c and dollar. ' ' - • These may actually be subdivided into  what appears to be a set of 5, 10. 20 cents and pattern dollar identified by 4 point rosettes in the obverse and reverse (20 cent reverse only) I (scarce or rare) Type A K.I 27,126, 125,124.1 ' 1. --- Fukien (Continued)

and 10 and 20 cents (illustrated in Yeoman, p 93) identified by large dots on both sides in place of the rosettes

(common) Type B K.126a, 125c All th^se coins are named in Chinese: "Made in the Official Fukien Mint". "c1902" Y.102-4 5c, 10c and 20c with different dragon These subdivide into a standard set of

5c, 10c and 20c (all common) Type C and 1Oc and 20c with larger dragons ani many m^ nor variations Type D

# K.I3I, 129, 128 K.I 30, 128kKalgan Shih t:also C11-6 CI 1-8

# K.135, 134, 133 K.I37, 136

Taiwan "C.I 890-2" Y.246-8 5G, 10C 20C These divide into two sets:5c (rare), 10c, 20c (rare) Type E 10c, 20c (rare) Type P

The only difference between tine two sets is the second character from the right at the top which reads as "province" in Type F. Both types of 10 cent appear to be from the same workshop ani show many minor die differences.

With the exception of Type C/D - which was of a unique design never again to be repeated - the coins bear a strong likeness to the coinage of Kwangtung, particularly the dragon reverses. Apart from the more obvious conclusion that they were all copied from the Cantonese coins, there are possibilities that some of the dies were produced by the Canton Mint - only a highly trained die maker coald reproduce the intricate dragon designs accurately, and the English legends provided their own proble.^s or even that some of the coins were actually struck at Canton.

The Canton Mint, after various trials and tribulations over the design and weight of its coins, started mass production of the Kwangtung silver coinage in the middle of 1390. Of the five coins of the set (Y.I 99-203) the dollar had to fight its own battle against the firmly established foreign dollars such as the Carolus, Mexican and Yen; the 50 cent piece met no particular need, but the 20, 10 an'^ occasionally the 5 cent pieces filled a vacuum for small cliange caused by the cash shoi-tage, and which had been only partially compensated for by the use of Hong Tong subsidiary silver coin on the mainland. Canton quickly became an exporter of "sm^.ll coin" up and dovra the coast; in October, 18S0 the newspapers reported interest snown by neighbo'-'.ring Pukien province:

"The Minche Viceroy requested the Liang-Kuang Viceroy (2) to coin one hundred dollars worth of 20, 10 and 5 cent pieces for circulation in the province under his jurisdiction.,.." (3) --- A month later the papers report:

"The Governor General of Hinche has received the sanction of the throne to establish new mints to coin dollars and cents similar to the Canton Mint. The enterprising Governor has already begun the building of the mint". (4)

The mint did not seem to materialise, and Fukien remained an importer of silver coin, certainly for the next couple of years. In his report for 1892 (dated 18.3.1893), H.B.M. Consul at FOGchow quotes figures obtained from the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, which show that in 1390 the bank imported into Poochow SI 5,000 worth of Hong Kong subsidiary coin for the local authorities; the following year this was increased to 2150,000 worth; anl "in 1892 the local authorities imported 350,000 dollars worth of Canton small coins, and this being insufficient a new mint is being established at Pagoda Anchorage (5)". The Consul goes on to say: "I am informed that the mint for sm:.ill coin, alluded to above, is already set up at Pagoda Anchorage, and that the Viceroy's decision as to whether operations are to commence at once is expected in a few days". (6)

A newspaper has references in both February and June 1393 (7) to the shortage of change, and rumours of an "Arsenal" mint being established. The Cantonese coinage had obviously become popular elsewhere by this stage, and the Canton mint unable to meet the demand; mintage fig'ares for 1893 onwards show that it was operating to its full capacity of 100,000 silver pieces per day.

Newspaper interestin 189^/5 was unfortunately diverted away from the currency to the more exciting events leading up to, and the--followed by the Sino-Japanese War, but H.B.M. Consul's reporl for 1893 (written early in 1894) has this correction:

"There are no silver coins made at Poochow, nor is there any machinery for making such at the port. The local mint makes only the common "cash"., " (8). So it looks as if the Poochow Arsenal Mac\>.e Mint of the 1890's was a myth.

The Imperial Maritime Customs maintained a "'omMissioner at Poochow,, His annual reports contain no inforjuation about mints until 1896, when he states:

"The scarcity of small cliange led to the opening of a mint in November, where pieces worth 10 and 20 (dollar) cents are struck. The coins are somewhat roughly finished."(9)

Visits to Chinese mints by Europeans were rare occurrences but in his report for 1896 (written early in 1897) H.B.M. Consul obligingly records: "Mr. Hughes of this consulate lately paid a visit to the Poochow Mint, established last year in the premises formerly the godown and offices of Messrs. Sas3o:)n, Sons & Co (10) for the coinage of subsidiary silver money, that is of coins representing a fractional part of a dollar. He reports that there are 4 presses worked by hand. Over 100 workmen are employed daily. Up to the present only 10 cent and 20 cent pieces are coined, but when the steam machinery expected from Japan arrives, 5 cent and 50 cent pieces, and possibly dollars too will be coined. The silver used
is 820 to 825 standard, an:- fro'. iC^CCO to:0,000 taels weight are being turned out every * z.onzr.* Jnere nave beon several cases of coining spurious small coins. I have in ~y safe some of the dies, that were seized on foreign premices." (11)

The story is then f o lo\>;;ed up by the T.M.C. annual reports until 1907. It is woi'th quoting them verbatim:

1897. "The scarcity of currency' was severely fel'; during th:\>  earlier part of the year. The unsuitac' 3 mCoChinery, hji^s "ily erected, and the natural inexperience of the employees of tne r.int, resulted in the issue of badly made coins, wnich for a time woi'ld not circulate. Later with new machinery, coins of beteer ap-pearance and more uniform weight were turned out, and no more trouble followed. During the year tne mint icsuod 1,198,851 pieces of 20 cents, 1,246,211 pieces of 10 cents ans"! 28,007 pieces of 5 cents. No doll.ar pieces were coined." (12) 1898 "The out-turn of the local mint for the 12 months was 1,382, 500 20 cent pieces, 968,000 10 cent pieces and 256,222 5 cent pieces, and the use of this small coinage is largel^' superseding the "chop" dollar - so much so, indeed, that emulative enterprise has led to the forgery of subsidiary coinage... " (''3)(14)

1899 "The coins made by the Fuhkien Mint during tne year have been 4,147,500 20 cent pieces, 2,904,000 10 cent, anl 768,666 5 cent pieces. Dies have been cut for 1 dollar and -5- dollar coins and when the mint reopens after the holidays, dollars and -j- dollars will also be coined. Moreover, improved mf-'cn~'nery is to be introduced for the manufacture of 5 cpnt pieces. At pi'esent these coins are turned out by hand, and the supply is now inadequate to me-^t the demdadwh'ch constantly exists for sma^" mone^'. With new machinery poscesr.ing automatic feeders, we may hope to see a good supply of 5 cent pieces put on the market. The manager info nas me that a large number of coins from the Fuhkien Mint fini their way to Manchuria. This seems strange, considering that tnere are mints both at Moukden and at Kirin; but it argues much for ti^e quality of th-: money coined in Foochow as compared with the quality of that minted in Manch'^rii^, (15) though locally it is thought much inferL'^r to that isoued by the Hong Kong and Canton Mints." ''16)

1900 (After references to a major flood). "The mint, which was alluded to in my last report, stopped work during the first week in July, owing to the impos.Jibility at that moment of effecting insurance * on* sycee from Shanghai. In October the authorities purchased the plant of th? mint, and in November started wor.cing on Governme-it account. In addition to issuing 10 cent and 20 cent pieces, it was decided to tarn out 10 Cash pieces (17); but at the end of the year, these last mentioned coins had not been put upon the market." (18)

There was no information on the mint in the report for 1901, but the report for Amoy for that year stated:

"Subsidiary copper coins produced at the Fuhkien Mint, made their first appearance here during the year and were at once put into circulation." (19)

1902 "For the last two years the Foochow Mint has coined copper coins without the traditional hole in the centre. Three denominations are minted, nominally equivalent to 5 Cash, 10 Cash and 20 Cash respectively. The 10 Cash coin, almost equivalent in value to a dollar cen^- changes for I3 cash. These cents, to the va^ue of HE Tls 67,000 were exported to Shanghai during the year." (20) --- **- ** **- -**

These copper coins can be identified witii c e r t a i n t y as - 99-101;  i t should be no-ued that they too bear tne Chinese Legend: "Made in the Official Pukien Mint".

The 1904 report contained a useful t a b l e of mintage f i g u r e s:

# 1902^ I903

20 Cents 5,462,740 1,558,487 7,401,497 10 Cents 2,008,467 620,478 1,630,870 5 Cents 1,456,000 20 Cash 18,650 10 Cash 15,624,893 45,927,486 106,257,790 5 Cash 123,927,467,985 (21)

19C5 "Hitherto this province has had a single mint, known as tne C^ty or Viceroy's Mint, situated in the suburb outside the South Gate, its chimneys being conspicuous on the river bank near the north end of the Stone Bridge. This Mint is adequate to the coinage requirements of the province, and even to supply coins (at a profit) to other parts of China. But early in 1905 the establishment of-not merely one, but - even two (sic) more Mints was resolved upon by the local government, apparently hoping for profit from tne export and sale of copper 10 cash coins. The machinery duly arrived and was set up ''in the summer) in one Mint at the Arsenal, near Pagoda Anchorage, and in another, known as the Vest Mint, at the small arms factory near the Upper Bridge. Then beg\<in a rather feverish output of * coins,* made chiefly from imported copoer discs or blanks - an output, which witn the machinery working well, might have exceeded 2,000,000 pieces per diem. The market value of the coins runk gradually below par ( at first the 10 Gash pieces fetched 13 cash); and, what was more serious, the pri^'ilege of unlimited minting was gradn^lly reduced by orders from Peking to 300,000 coins a day, while the export to othe provinces was forbidden. ''22) The two new Mints at present &tan5 idxe." (23)

H.B.M. Consul's report for 1905 amplifies this information «lightly by stating: "The new Mint erected during the year by the Tartar General was supplied by a German firm" (24); Commencini (25' indentifies the Fookien Customs House 10 cash coins (Y.97) as one issued by the Tartar General and Superintendent of Customs at the Mamoi Arsenal. (It is not immediately obvious what type of 10 cash was struck at the "West" mint). The U.S. Mint Report for 1906 fortuitously shows some Chinese mintage figures for 1905 including 7,599,271 20 cents and 97,929 10 cents for Foochow (26).

The "".M.C. report for 1907 rounds off the tale with referencpi to allegations of embezzlement - investigations - disgrace; and a statement that all three '^lints were now under the sole control of the Central Government at Peking (27).
From tnis data it is worth bringing out the following key points:-

1. There ^ s a cons-'dered stateme-it by F.B.M. Consult in early  1894 to the effect that there was no machinery for making silver coins in Foochow. 2. The definite establishment of the Foochow Citj^ Mint late  1896, producing,initially, badly made 10 and 2Ü~cents on hand presses, and then better made 5, 10 and 20 cenrs (on steam machinery, a\_ad poss i' ly from master dies, supplied by Japan) from I807. 3. The arrival of one of these sets of coins, probably obtained  by H.B.M. Consul, in the Royal Mint, London, by 1898; and which is of Type 'C'. 4. The statement that the "authorities" took over the running  of tne Mint on "GovernmenT; account" in 1 900 - implying that the earlier concern had been a semi-private or cominei'cial afCalx". 5. The issue of copper coin in 1901 * hea-vin^;* the legend "Made at  the Official Fukien Mint". 6. The fact that the silver series type A/B bear this same legend.  7. No record of any 5 cent pieces being minted after 1902.

Checking throux\>-h the accescion dates of the Fukienese silver coins in the col'ections of the British Museum, it is interesting to note that'neither of the silver coins type A/B were acquired before * \\3'5b',* on the other hand 10 and 20 cents type C, and one 10 cent Type B were acquirea m 189y (as well as a contemporary forgery of a 20 cent type C/D in 1901).

This seems to prove the fo\] lowing pa+l'ern of evenhs as being the more likely: 1896-7 The Foochow Mint produces 10 ^: 20 cents type D (Kani 130, 128-t; Kalgan Shih Gil-6, C11-8). 1897-9 The mint produces 5, 10 an^ 20 cents type C (K.131, 129 and 128) possibly from master dies obtained in Japan. In view of the remarks, and the fact that the 5 cent ^s 'ot scarce, it is probable that e large issue of these coins (K.I 31) was made in the first half of this year. The Foochow Mint, under the title "OffLcial Mint", issues copper 5, 10 and 20 Cash (Y.99-101) and silver 5, 13 and 20

cetitstype A (K.I 27, 126,125), possibly in view of the high quality and close resemblance to the Kwantung coinage, using reverse dies SL'ppl'ied by the Canton Mint; also strikes a pattern dollar (K.124). 1903-4 New dies for the 20 cent and 10 cent are introduced (type B) poscibly locally made. 1905-6 Last year of silver minting.
All of which seems to indicate that there may be pattern dollars and half dollars of 1899 (type C) still to be uncovered: and as there are no coins left unaccounted for it must be assumed that the specific oz-der for coins placed with the Canton Mint in 1890 was for Kwar^ung coinage.

Now, having eliminated the Foochow Arsenal Mint until 1905, and no silver mint having been recorded for Taiwan up to the time of its secession to Japan in 1895, the q^uestion outstanding is where did the Taiwanese silver coinage come from? Curiously, the answer is fairly straightforward, A newspaper reported in 189 3:

"The new mint at Formosa turned out for the first time a large quantity of ten and twenty cent pieces on 20th inst.j the Canton Mint being unable to supply the amount yearly required by the Formosa Government. In design the new Formosa money is like its Canton prototype, with the exception that the name of HM the Emperor Kuang Hsu is omitted (28)." (29)

H.B.M. Consul at Tamsui (N.Formosa) in his re\])ort for 1893 is more specific:

"During the year the Government has turned out a considerable amoiint of subsidiary silver coinage. This, however, has been done without any minting machinerv properly so called, but the coins have bef.n struck by cartridge making machines, slightly altered, which answers well (30), though only 5 cent and 10 cent pieces C£in be issued, as the presr^ is not strong enough to coins the heavier 20 cent pieces. The intrinsic value of these coins is, I believe, not so great as tiiose minted in Canton.,". (31)

The contradictory references to 10 and 20 cent coins, and then 5 cerit and "^ 0 cent coins, is probably due to the six months interval between the respect^'ve reports. The British Museum acquired two specimens of 10 cents type E and two of type F in 1893. From examination of these and other coins it is evident  that neither type is of sufficiently good workmanship to have been produced from Canton dies. It therefore seems likely that both

sets of coins (K.I 33-5, 136-7) were produced in Taiwan in 1893, probably at the Taipeh arsenal, on dies copies from the Canton coinage. From the relative scarcity of 10 cent type F (K.I 37), and the lack of any 5 cent in the set, type F was probably the prototype set, being superseded by Type E (K.I 33, 134, 135) later in the year. Only 10 cent coins were, in fact, struck in any quantity.

My thanks are due to Mr. J. Cribb and Mr. G.P. Dyer for giving me the opportunity to inspect the British Museum and Royal Mint Collections respectively. ***s *** ***. f ***
Appendix: A Summary of Pukien Silver Mintage Figures. 1 906 References 20 Cent 1,198,851 1,382,500 4,147,500? 5,462,740 1,558,487 7,401,497 7,599,271 **• ** **• • ** 10 Cent 1,246,211 968,000 2,904,000 2,008,467 620,478 1,630,870 97,929 5 Cent 28,007 256,222 (32) 768,666 5 m i l l i o n? Closed for 6 months.? 1,456,000

1.  Kann. E., Illustrated Catalog of Chinese Coins, Reprinted U.3. 1966. ^ Kalgan Shih, Modern Coins of China, Shanghai 1949 Tsiang, C.C., Illustrations of Chinese... Coins, Shanghai 1239 Wayte-Ramond, Ooms of the "orid, 19th Century, U.S. 1953

20th Century, U.S. 1951 Su, T.K., Illustrated Catalog of Chinese Coins, Taiwan 1974 2.  The Viceroyalties of Fukien-Chekiang an." Kuangtung-Kwangsi respectively. 3.  The Chinese Times, 25 Oct. 1390, P.684. 4.  The Chinese Times, 29 Nov. 1890, P.763. 5.  The Pagoda Anchorage is about 10 miles do\\.ru river from Foochow City. The Foochow Naval Dockyard and the main (Mamoi or Makiang) arsenal were adjacent. 6.  British\_Consular Comraercidl Report (BCCR) No. 1216, P.7. 7.  North China Daily News, 28 Feb. 1893 and 6 June 1893 (both reports extracted from the Foochow Daily Echo): the article in the Celestial Empire, 10 Nov. 1893 contains the inf Ou'!ij.tion from the HK and Shanghai Bank quoted earlier, 8.  BCCR No. 1392 P.6. 9.  Imperial Maritime Customs Trade Rept)rt (IMCTR) for 1896 P.362 10.  Note that this is in Foochow City and not the arsenal. BCCR No. 1907, P.14. IMCTR for 1897, P.372 The British Museum Collection contains a contemporary forgery of a Pukien 20c acquired in 1901.
\_ 9 *i* "•'/ IMCTR for 1898, P. 380 A sentiment not echoed by the Cominissioner for Newchang (J^anchuria); see IHCTR for 1898, P.8 IMCTR for 1399, P.435 This was following the example of the Canton Mint which introduced the 1 cent or\* 10 Cash coin in 1900 IMCTR for 1900, P.427 IMCTR for 1901, P.474 IMCTR for 1902, P.530 IMCTR for 1904, P.622 This restriction was imposed on all provinces. A higher daily allocation was given to the larger mints. IMCTR for 1905, P.358 BCCR No. 3710, P.7 Comencini, Coins of the Modern World 1870-1936 U.K. 1937 Report of the Director of the U.S. Mint 1906, P.184 IMCTR for 1907, P.423 Probably an oblique reference to the omission of the usual Manchu translation. North China Daily News, 30 June 1893, P.591 The Royal Mint Report for 1399 contains the information that the Moukden Mint, when not being used for coining, was employed for other purposes, such as making screws. BCCR No. 1395, P.9 The Royal Mint Report for 1899 contains Chinese mintage figures for 1398. Those shown for Foochow differ: 20 cents 3,567,-,500 10 cents 3,019,005

5 cents 88,000 It is not clear from what source these were obtained.

\\