# AN ANNOTATED

*LIST * *OF BOOKS ON COINS * *PUBLISHED * *IN * *INDIA: * *1960-1970. *

*Note: * *This * *list * *was * *compiled * *for * *the * *information * *and * *use * *of * *members * *of * *the * *Oriental * *Numi smat i c Society, * *It * *is * *believed * *to * *be * *re lat * *i vely * *complete * *for * *the * *decade, * *as * *of * *July * *1, * *1970, * *but * *omissions * *subsequently * *discovered * *and * *new * *books * *subsequent * *Iy * *pub I i shed * *will * *be * *brought * *to * *members' * *attent * *ion * *through * *the * *Soci ety's * *News I* * * *etter, * *Most * *of * *the * *books * *are * *s* * * *t* * * *i* * * *l* * * *l * *in * *print. * *Orders * *should * *be * *addressed * *to * *the * *publishers. * *All * *are * *paper * *bound * *unless * *otherw * *i se * *noted.* ^ /

*Biddulph * *C.H. * *COINS * *OF THE CHOLAS. * *Numismatic * *Notes * *and * *Monographs * *No.13, * *The Numismatic * *Society * *of * *India, * *Varanasi,1968. * *vi, * *65pp., * *5pls. * *Rs.lO *

*The* best * brief * *study * *available * *of * *^holas * *coinage, * *and * *a sequel * *to * *the *

*author'* * * *s earlier * *monograph * *on * *the * *Pandyan * *coi nage. * *It * *covers * *the *

*history, * *including * *a chrono * *Iogi * *cal * *list * *of * *ChoI a rulers * *from * *cAD846 *

*to* * * *C.1279;* * * *religion; * *and * *the * *coins: * *metrology, * *emblems, * *and * *general *

*observations * *on * *the * *gold, * *silver * *and * *copper * *issues^ * *A detailed * *list *

*includes * *commentary * *on * *the * *coin * *types * *illustrated * *in * *the *

*excellent * *plates. * *The * *coins * *illustrated * *are * *from * *the * *author's *

*col Iect * *i on; * *the * *British * *Museum; * *the * *Fitzwilliam * *Museum, * *Cambridge, *

*and * *the * *Government * *Museum, * *Madraso * *A brief * *appendix * *lists * *and *

*comments * *on nine * *published * *Chola * *coins * *not * *included * *in * *the * *plates. *

*Biddulph * *C.H. * *COINS OF THE PANDYAS. * *Numismatic * *Notes * *and * *Monographs * *No.II, * *The Numismatic * *Society * *of * *India, * *Varanasi,1966, * *71pp., * *6pls, * *Rs.lO. *

*Of * *the * *three * *Drav idi an * *groups * *impor * *tant * *in * *early * *Southern * *India, * *the *

*Pandyas, * *ChoI as and * *Cheras, * *the * *first * *were * *domi nant. * *This * *monograph *

*gives * *a concise * *account * *of * *the * *origin, * *Ianguages * *and * *religion * *of * *the *

*Pandyas, * *and * *the * *infIuence * *on * *them * *of * *the * *Aryans * *and * *other * *races * *with *

*whom they * *came * *in * *contact. * *It * *then * *gives * *the * *names * *and * *titles * *of *

*Pandyan * *kings * *appearing * *on * *their * *coins, * *and * *attempts * *to * *link * *them *

*with * *the * *known * *rulers. * *The * *author * *descr * *i bes * *the * *gold, * *silver * *and *

*copper * *coins, * *as well * *as * *those * *issued * *by * *the * *Pandyas * *in * *Ceylon. * *The *

*work * *cone Iudes * *with * *an * *annotated * *catalogue, * *i ncIud * *i ng provenance, * *of * *the *

*127 coins * *illustrated * *in * *the * *fairly * *clear * *plates. * *Three * *Pandyan *

*copper * *coins * *from * *Ceylon * *overstruck * *by * *the * *Ganga * *Banas * *and * *Kal * *inga *

*Gangas, * *and * *four * *poss i bI e prototypes * *for * *some * *early * *Pandyan * *coins * *are *

*includedo * *Two appendices * *give * *the * *names * *and * *titles * *of * *rulers * *in *

*English * *and * *Tamil, * *and * *a * *list * *of * *13 Pandyan * *coins * *published * *elsewhere *

*and not * *included * *in * *the * *plates. *
# AN ANNOTATED LIST OF BOOKS ON CQINS PUBLISHED IN INDIA; **1960-1970 ** **II **

**Chattopadhyay, Bhaskar. ** **THE AGE OF THE KDSHAKAS - A NUMISMATIC STUDY. Pulished ** **by Sri Sankar Bhattaoharya, Punthi Pustak, 34, Mohan Began Lane, Calcutta-^, ** **1967. xxxiii, 289 PP., 5pl». R». 48. ** **(Hard cover). **

**The author i s Lecturer in History at the University of Burdwan. ** **This work was **

**originally prepared as a Ph.D. thesis. University of Calcutta, 1966. ** **In 10 **

**chapters, i t discxisses early Kushan history, the development of Kushan coinage, **

**representations of kings and deities on the coins, metrology, legends and symbols **

**provenance, and the Indian heritage of foreign numiasatic traditions. **

**Bibliography, script and symbol charts, key to plates, index, and 2 pages of **

**errata. ** **The plates are repz^ïduoed (in reduced size) from Vol. I, Indian **

**Museum Catalogue. ** **Grenerally a oorapendium drawn from earlier works, adding ** **l i t t l e. **

**Das &upta. Dr. Kalyan K\\miar. ** **THE AUDUMBARAS. Calcutta Sanskrit College Research ** **series No. XLI7, Studies No. 26. Published by the Principal, Sanskrit College, ** **1,** ** Bankim Chatterjee Street, Calcutta-12, I965. xvii, 42 pp., 5pls., map, ** **Rs.** ** 4\* ** **(Hard cover) **

**A brief study of one of the ancient independent tribal states of North India **

**drawing on traditional as well as sane l i t t l e used literary sources. ** **It takes **

**up the location, antiquity, and the origin or the name of the tribe; ** **describes ** **the coins in three Classes of 4, 3 and 11 varieties respectively; seeks to ** **establish a general coin chronology; ** **examines 9 symbols fo\\md on the coin; ** **and ** **gives brief notes on forejgn influence; ** **political, religious and economic ** **conditions; and ethnology. ** **An appendix describes two classes of coins attributed ** **to the Vemakas, a neighbouring tribe. ** **Index. ** **Select bibliography. ** **The plates **

**show 20 coins enlarged to double size, several worn specimens, but clearly ** **printed. **

**Das Gupta. Dr. Kalyan Kumar. THE MALAVAS. Calcutta Sanskrit College Research **

**Series No. L, Studies No. 29. Published by the Principal, Sanskrit College, ** **1, Bankim Chatterjee Street, Calcutta-12, I966, xvii, 36pp., 3 pis., map, Rs.7. ** **(Hard** ** cover). **

**This essay gives a brief account of the history and location of the North **

**Indian Malava Tribe, and classifies the coins into two groups with 2? varieties **

**in the first and 31 varieties divided into two classes inthe second. It **

**discusses devices and s^nabols, general coin chronology, interpretation of coin **

**legends,** ** metrology, and the economic and political conditions and ethnology of **

**the tribe. Index. Select bibliography. Addenda and Corrigenda. The plates **

**show 36 Indian Museum coins in poor reproduction but normal size. **
# AN ANNOTATED LIST OF BOOKS ON COINS PUBLISHED IN IHIHA t 1960-1970. **Ill **

**Gopal,** ** Lallanji. EARLT MEDIEVAL C0IN-TTPE3 OF NOTHERN INDIA. Numismatic Notes and ** **Monographs No. 12. Published by the lumismatic Society of India, 7aranasi,1966. ** **•» 81pp., 12 pis., Rs.15. **

**This work is divided into two parts, the first analysing the medieval North **

**Indian coin types, their origin, authorship and historical implications; the **

**second arranging the coin types in catalogue form by the issuing dynasties. **

**In Part I, the author notes four major tjrpes; king and fire altar (with some **

**sub-types),** ** standing king and seated goddess, bull and horseman, and seated **

**goddess;** ** and three minor types; Hanuman, lion attacking elephant, and cow **

**suckling calf. The dynasties in Part II include those of Kashmir, Ind»-Sassanian, **

**Gurjara-Pratiharas, Palas Jajapellas of** *** 'Sarwa.T,*** ** Surasena, Ohind, Kalachuris, **

**Chandellas, Gavadavalas, Rashtrakutas of Badaun, Tadus of Bayana, Chahamanas, and **

**5 miscellaneous uncertain types. The generally clear plates illustrate 169 **

**coins.** ** A very useful reference for a difficult period, **

# Gupta, Parmeshwari Lai. THE AMARAVATI HOARD OP SILVER PUNCH-MARKED COINS.

**Andhra Pradesh Government Museum Series No,** ** 6,** ** Published by the Government of ** **Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, 1963, iii, 188 pp., 31 pis. Rs. 25. **

**This is an analysis of a hoard of** ** 7,668** ** punch-marked coins found in 1953 at **

**Amaravati, a Satavahana capital in Andhra Pradesh. The author finds 302 **

**varieties of obverse symbols arranged in 235 different types of groupings. **

**Of these 74 groups are previously unpublished, and 48 are known only from this **

**hoard. The hoard contains 15 misstruck "freaks" which appear to show that coins **

**with different sets of symbols were issued from the same mint, 96 restruck coins **

**and one cast "punch-marked" coin. The symbols are illustrated in the first three **

**plates and their groupings are shown in the text. The remaining plates show ** **obverse and reverse of 1,048 coins, **

**Gupta, Parmeshwari Lai, COINS (No. 29 in the Series "India-The Land and People,") ** **Published by the Secretary, National Book Trust, India, New Delhi-16, 1969, ** **xi,** ** 241 pp., 34 pis. Rs.9.50 (Hard** ** cover). **

**The best general overview of Indian coinage since C.J. Brown's The Coins of India **

**was published in 1922. Designed for the general reader, it is packed with **

**factual detail - and some dubious assumptions (e.g. "it may reasonably be claimed **

**that the coins originated in India at least a century before Lyüia of China **

**thou^t of them,") Separate shapters deal with the beginning of coins, early **

**Indian coins, coins of foreign invaders, Kushanas and their successors, post-**

**Maurjran pre-Gupta, early south and west India, Guptas, Hunas and other dynasties, **

**post-Gupta north India, later south India, Muslim dynasties of Delhi, Muslim **

**states of north and south India, Mughals, Hindu rulers of the Muslim period, **

**successors of the Hu^ials, Indo-European, native states, and Indian Republic, **

**A brief bibliography is given for each chapter. The plates illustrate 366 coin **

**types,** ** with a brief description of each in an accompanying catalogue. **
# AK AWTQTATBD LIST OF BOOKS ON COINS PCBLISH^ IN INDIA; 1960-1970

&upta, Paimeshwari Lal. PUNCH-MARKED COINS IN THE ANDHRA PRADESH GOVEilNMENT MUSEUM. Andhra Pradesh Sovemment Museum Series No. 1, Published by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, I96I, v i i i, 135 pp., 9 pls. Rs. 5.

This monograph catalogues 751 punch-marked coins in the Hyderabad Museun

oolleotion, analysing them by find sites (fotir hoards and two excavations) a l l

in former Hyderabad State. The coins show 9I varieties of obverse symbol groups, of which nine were previously unknown. All but the smallest (8' coins)

of the hoards contain pre^auryan and Hauryan coins together, and the presence

of a large nximber from Taxila indicates "brisk trade relations" with the northwest. A total of 133 obverse symbols and 10 reverse sjrmbols are described in text and two plates, and the coins are analysed by symbol groups.

In four appoidices, they are catalogued by find s i t e, varieties, reverse marks, and weights. Two final chapters describe 12 stray coins in the Musexim and some terracotta moulds used for casting "punch-marked" coins. The seven photographic plates sire poorly reproduced, but show 195 coins and 30 mould fra^nents. -

Gupta, Parmeshwari Lai, ROMAN COINS FROM ANDHRA PRADESH. Andhra Pradesh Government Museum Series No. 10. Published by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, I965. iv, 130 pp., 26 pis. Rs.lif, In a field of numismatic study long neglected by Indian andVestem classical scholars alike, this is the f i r s t serious attempt to analyse the coins which flooded into India from Rome during the Imperial period. Dr. Gupta f i r s t gives a concise history of Indo-Roman trade relations, and then presents a 30-page description of Roman coinage designed primarily as an introduction for Indian

students unfamiliar with Roman numismatics (much of i t lifted verbatim from Seaby's Roman Coins and their Values) « He l i s t s 62 recorded finds of Roman

coins from a l l over the s\\ibcontinent, and attempts to assess the generally

inadequate record of their content to show how trade fluctuated in time and shifted * ±0* various Indian areas. Of the 62 finds, 17 located in Andhra Pradesh, are studied in more detail. The coins described are ftequaitly defaced with

outs and punch-marks or cut into fragments, and many contemporary imitations have been found. Two hoards of 1531 and 39 ooins are tabulated by size, weight

and countermarks in the appendices, and 531 are illustrated in the plates.

The publication is replete with typographical errors, the plates are generally too dia to be read, the coins described are not keyed to Cohen or other

standard wozics, and the ooins in the tabulations and plates are not indentified by Emperor. Nevertheless, Dr. Gupta's analysis «aid conclusions make an

interesting and useful contribution to the study of early East-^est relations.
# AN AMOTATED LIST OF BOOKS OK COINS PÜBLISHBP IN INDIA: 1960-1970. **V **

**Huflsain, U.K. ** **CATALOGUE OP COINS OF THE MÜ&HAL EMPEHORS. Published by the ** **Direotorate of Archives and Archaeology, Maharashtra State, Bombay, I968. ** **z, 20JfPP., 10 pis. ** **Rs. 12 (Hardcover). **

**The author, nuaismatist of the Maharashtra ^haeology Department, has ccsnpiled **

**a catalogue of 1044 coins of 18 Emperors from Akbsu? to Muhammad Akbar II. The **

**coins are from the accumulations accruing to the department under Indian **

**treasure trove laws. ** **The tabulations show metal, mint, date, weight, size, and **

**inscriptions, byt S3^bols are omitted. ** **References are frequently given to the **

**same coins in other standard catalogues. ** **There i s no analysis of the coins, **

**and, as the author says in the Preface, "No attempt has been made to solve the **

**more obscure nvmiismatic problems". ** **Some British East India Company issues are **

**mistakenly attributed to Alamgir II and Shah Alam II. ** **Nine gold but no copper **

**ooljtis are included. ** **Excellent plates show I63 coins. **

**Krishan, Bal. ANCIENT INDIAN COINAI^, A Select Bibliography. Published by Shri Ram ** **Swarup Sharma, Director, The Research Institute of Ancient Scientific Studies, ** **26/139-1W) West Patel Nagar, New Delhi-8, I968. 55 pp. Rs, 15. ** **This small volume is a compilation of the bibliograi^ic material which the **

**author provided for COINAGE IN ANCIENT INDIA by Prakash and Singh (q.v.) with ** **a few general references added. ** **In i«0 pages, i t l i s t s 194 articles, catalogues **

**and books with very brief annotations covering punch-marked and tribal, Indo-** **G-reeks, Sakas, Pahlavas, Kushanas, Nagas, Kshatrapas, G'Uptas, Huns, Vardhanas, ** **Rajputs, Kashmir, seven Kingdoms of the Deccan (Satavahanas, Ikshvakus, **

**Kalaohuries, Vishnukundins, Chalukyas, Yadavas and Kakatiyas), and five kingdoms ** **of South India (Pallavas, Cholas, Pandyas, Kadambas, and Vi jayanagar). ** **With ** **the exception of the British and Punjab Museum catalogues, it ignores most ** **material published outside India, ** **Also, i t i s marred by numarous typographical ** **errors and by the lack of any definition of the abbreviations used in references. **

**An article, "Ancient Coinage in India " by Bal Krishan and G.D. Khullar, giving **

**a 13 page overview, i s appended. ** **The author is Librarian, NationELL Museum, ** **New Delhi. **
# AIJ AIT\>^OTATED LI3T OF BOOKS OU C0IN3 PUBLI3i:CD IN IIDIA; 1960-1970. VI

Lahiri, A.N. COR-'TTS OF INDO-SRS^'.K CODE'S. Published by Poddar P u b l i c a t i o n s, 34, Raja Santoah Road, Calcutta-27, 1965. x v i i, 290 p p., 54 p i s. Rs. 105. (Hard cover).

A useful and carefully arranged compilation of most of the previous rese-arch

in the Indo-G-reek f i e l d, t h i s scholarly work is divided into threw p a r t s:

Introduction, Catalogue, and Appendices. The 68-page Introduction provides

a c r i t i c a l assessment of e a r l i e r studies and of a r t, metrology, devices,

special i s s u e s, legends, monograms, modem forgeries, and ancioit i m i t a t i o n s.

I t discusses but makes no attempt to solve problems of chronology and monogram

i n t e r p r e t a t i o n. The Catalogue l i s t s 42 rulers alphabetically, giving the coin

t;/pes of each with references to known examples. The five appendices (74 pages)

include a l i s t of obverse and reverse types showing the kings to which thev are

a t t r i b u t e d, an i l l u s t r a t e d l i s t of 441 Greek-type monograms and seven Indian-

type symbols with references to the coins on which t h e / appear, a l i s t by kings

of the monograms each used and the monogram\<-links to coins of other r u l e r s, an

annotated l i s t of t i t l e s and e p i t h e t s, and a discussion of 10 probable casss of

the same name used by more than one king. Select bibliography and d e t a i l e d

index. The plates i l l u s t r a t e 404 coin types. The author i s Lecturer in Ancient

Indian History and Culture, University of Calcutta,

Mehta Vasishtha, Dev. Mohan. THE INDO-GKBEK COINS. Published by the Indologioal Research I n s t i t u t e, Ludhlana, 1967. x v i, 196 p p., 7 p i s, ( P r i c e unknown)

Not examined. "This handy volime contains xiseful material on Indo-Sreek coins." (Bal Krishan)

Ilohan Das, P.11. GOIL'J OF INDIA THROUGH TH\*-\] AGKS. Published by the Governnent Kusexi:n Madras, I960, 17 pp., 3 pls, 40 paise.

This booklet traces the history of Indian coinage in 19 brief sections, from

punch-marked purtnas to issues of the East India Compaiy, ind describes in text

and plates 32 coin types from bent-bar to the 'ralf star pagoda. Written by th»^

Curator of the Ihunismatic Section of the.'iuseum, it is intenrled to accompany * a *

boxed set of 3? cast replicas offered for sale (RS. 78.69) by thf I;\\iseum to educational institutions as a study guide.
# M.^T?^OTATSD LIST OF B0CK3 OIT COINS PUBLiai:JD IN IIDIA; 1960-1970. VI

Lahiri, A.N. COR-'US OF DIDO-SRS-'K CO TOS. Published by Podiar Publications, 54, Raja Santosh Road, Calcutta-27, I965. xvii, 29O pp., 54 pis. Rs, 105. (Hard cover). A useful and carefully arranged compilation of most of the previous research *in* the Indo-Greek field, this scholarly work is divided into three parts: Introduction, Catalogue, and Appendices, The 68-page Introduction provides a c r i t i c a l assessment of earlier studies and of art, metrology, devices, special issues, legends, monograms, modem forgeries, and anciait imitations. It discusses but makes no attempt to solve problems of chronology and monogram interpretation. The Catalogue l i s t s 42 rulers alphabetically, giving the coin t;^es of each with references to known examples. The five appendices (74 pages) include a l i s t of obverse and reverse types showing the kings to which thev are attributed, an illustrated l i s t of 441 G-reek-type monograms and seven Indiantype symbols with references to the coins on which the/ appear, a l i s t by kings of the monograms each used and the monograiB\<-links to coins of other rulers, an annotated l i s t of t i t l e s and epithets, and a discussion of 10 probable cases of the same name used by more than one king. Select bibliography and detailed index. The plates illustrate 24O4 coin types. The author is Lecturer in Ancient Indian History and Culture, University of Calcutta.

Mehta Vasishtha, Dev. Mohan. THE INDO-GBEEK COINS. Published by the Indologioal Research Institute, Ludhlana, I967. xvi, I96 pp., 7 pis, (Price unknown) Not examined. "This handy volime contains useful material on Indo-Sreek coins." (Bal Krishan)

I'lohnn Das, P.N. GOII.'.'J OF INDIA THROUGH * TRK* AGKS. i^ublished by the Governnent Fuseiun Madras, I960, 1? pp., 3 pis, 40 priise.

This booklet traces the history of Indian coinage in 19 brief sections, from

punch-marked purt'naa to issues of the East India Company, ind describes in text

and plates 32 coin tjrpes from bent-bar to the half star pngoda. Written by th^

Curator of the r;iunismatic Section of the '.useiun, it is intemled to accompany a

boxed set of 32 cast replicas offered for sale (RS, 78,69) by thf Iluseum to educational institutions as a study guide.
# M ANNOTATED LIST OF BOOKS ON COINS PUBLISHED IN INDIA; 1960-1970 **VII **

**Hukherjee, Dr. B.N. NANA** *** OS*** ** LION, A Study in Euahana Numismatic Art. Published by ** **the General Secretary, The Asiatic Society. 1, Park Street, Calcutta(-16, 1969. ** **xiii,** ** 159 pp., 15 pis. Rs, 35. (lard cover) **

**This is an Iconographic study of the Babylonian (Sumerian) goddess Nana as she **

**appears sitting on a lion on the coins of the Eushanas, designed to contribute **

**to an understanding of the role of Kushan coinage in the evolution of Indian **

**plastic art and religious iconography. The ntanismatio point of departure is **

**the unique gold stater of Kanishka published by M.F.C. Martin in the Nxunismatic **

**Supplement (of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal) XLIV, 1931-53» **

**p.** ** 8-9» from the Singhi Collection, Calcutta. But the author covers the **

**representations of Nana and related deities on other coins, éeals and statues, **

**and gives attention to devices, style and technique, and rulers, artists and **

**environment. He concludes that Nana on Lion "made a distinct constrlbution to **

**the development of the iconographic concepts of the Devi" (e.g., in one of her **

**forms as Durga on** ** Lion).** ** He amplifies the study in six appendices dealing **

**with a prototype of a Eushan obverse design, the deity of Pushkalavati, the **

**influence of Indo-Roman trade on the Eushan conquest of India, and the repre-**

**sentation of deities on three different archeologlcal finds. Catalogues of **

**the plates, select bibliography, and index» The clearly reproduced plates show **

**33 coins, 17 statues, 6 seals and 2 silver dishes. **

# Nayar, T, Balakrishnan. THE DOWLAISHWERAM HOARD OP EASTERN CHALDEYAN AND CHOLA COINS.

**Bulletin of the Madras Grovemment Museum, Madras, 1966. 42, iv pp., 7 pis., map. ** **Hs,** ** 4.80, **

**This is an analysis of 127 gold coins,** ** tiie** ** recovered portion of a larger hoard **

**found in 1946 in a village of East Godavari district in Andhra Pradesh, of idiioh **

**49 are attributed to Rajaraja I (1019-1059 A.D.) of the Eastern Chalukyan dynasty **

**and 78 to Eulottunga I (1071-1120 A.D.) of the Chola dynasty. The importance of **

**the hoard lies in the fact that it is the first discovexyof coins of Eulottunga I **

**of similar weight and fabric to those of his father, Rajaraja I. The coins and **

**their inscriptions and devices are fully described** ** in.** ** a aeries of tables. The **

**plates** *** ahotr*** ** characteristic\<** ** coins,** ** enlarged drawings of their central devices and ** **of related seals.. **
# AN AMOTATED LIST OF BOOKS OH COINS PUBLISHED IN IHDIAt 1960-1970 **VIII **

# \*

**Vali Khan, Muhammad Abdul. BAHT'ANI COINS IN THE AKDHRA PRADSSH GOVERNMENT MUSSUM, **

**HYDERABAD, Andhra Pradesh Government Museum Series No. 7, Published by the ** **Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, 1964. 1 pi., xv, 183 PP.,. 35 pls. Rs,18, **

**The Hsrderabad Iiuseum holds some** ** 5,000** ** coins issued by 15 of the 18 Bahmani kings **

**of the Deccan, including 10 gold, 270 silver and the rest of copper. This work **

**catalogues all of the gold and silver and 502 copper to illustrate representative **

**types.** ** An introductory note includes references to published types not in the **

**Museu?-** ** collection. The catalogue is preceded by an historical survey (1345-1527) **

**of the dynasty. The list of coins gives metal, mint, date, weight, size, **

**provenance when known, and the inscription as it ap^oears on the coin and **

**transliterated. The inscriptions are also reproduced by king and coin** *** type*** ** at the **

**end. On successive plates, 299 coins are shown first in photographs, which are not **

**always legible, and then in ink rubbings, which are generally clear. An initial **

**plate shows two examples of Bahmani architecture, and a ter^iinal plate shous two **

**copper containers in which hoards of the silver coins were found, **

**Gupta, Parmeshwari Lai, COIN HOARDS FROM GUJARAT STATE, Numismatic Notes and Monographs No. ** **15,** ** Published by the Numismatic Society of India, Varanasi, 1969. 3, 24pp. Rs.3. **

**This booklet lists 126 coin hoards found in Gujarat between 1848 and 1959 and 13 **

**in Sind between 1856 and 1918. Mughal coins predominate (found in 36 of the hoards) **

**followed by the Sultans of Gujarat (20), Gupta (18) Vestem Kahatrapas (15), and **

**Gadhiya and the Sultans of Delhi (l2** ** each).** ** One hoard included "a few" Armenian **

**silver coins and two included Venetian gold coins. Details of most of the finds **

**are incomplete, and in a preface the author explains the difficulties he faced: **

**no treasure trove law prior to 1878, no records of finds examined by the Bombay **

**Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society (designated recipient for all hoards found in **

**the Bombay Presidency area until** ** 1922),** ** and only vcanty records by the Prince of **

**Vales Museum, Bombay, from 1922 onxrards. The author compiled the list from such i **

**records and other publications of finds (listed idiere available) while he was **

**Numismatist at that Huseiui from 1954 to 1963\* The booklet is marred by **

**typographical errors (e.g.. Hoard y^ 19 was found in** ** •'1989''),** ** but the Western **

**India provenance evidence it does contain for coins f^mtpunchmarks to Victoria ** **and Native States is of value. **
# AS AJPIOTATSD LIST OF BOOKS ON COINS POBUSHBD IN INDIA; 1960-1970 **IX **

**Maity» Saehindra Eumar. EARLY INDIAN COINS AND CURRENCY SYSTEM. Published ** **by Kunshiram Hanoharlal, 54 Rani Jhanso Road, New Delhi-35t 1970. ** **zii,** ** 136 pp. Rs.20. (Hard** ** cover). **

**The author advocates the concept that the chronology of early Indian **

**dynasties can be fixed by the application of Qresham's Lav to the **

**declining gold content of** ** ttieir** ** coins. He supports this idea with analytical **

**tables covering** ** tiie** ** gold issues of the Eushan,Sa8sanian, Gupta, Tomara, **

**Oahadavala, Ealachuri and Chandella** *** èyn&BtieB.*** ** ** **This thesis is preceded by **

**general chapters on the role of numismatics in the study of Indian political, **

**administrative, migratory, religious, ecoiiofflic and cvilt\\iral history; and on **

**the exchange systems and metrology in use in the Indus Valley, Vedic, Kauryan, **

**Indo-Greek, Eushan, Gupta, post-Gupta and early medieval periods. /In essaj **

**on the culture of the Guptas as deduced from their coins is added as an **

**appendix, followed by an 11 page bibliography and comprehensive index. No **

**plates.** ** The author ibeaches ancient Indian history at Jadavpur University, ** **Calcutta. **

**Mohan, Mehta 7asishtha Dev. THE INDO-GREEE COINS. Published by the Indological ** **Research Institute, 482-R Model Town, Ludhiana, 1967. xvi, 196pp, 7 pis. ** **Rs.** ** 32. (Hard** ** cover). **

**This book attempts a re-interpretation of the Indo-Greek period by a new **

**look at the results of eeurlier numismatic xesearch in the li^t of recent finds **

**and of a close correlation of ''near-contemporary Indian literature". It **

**starts with two (among other) basic assumptions; **

**(l) that "the attempts of Rapson, Hacdonald, Tarn and others'\* were "coloured **

**with anxiety to glorify the Gre^...., putting the Indian in an unfavourable **

**light," and (s) that "all Indo-Greek currency consisted of oast coins," the **

**ignorance of idiich fact led earlier scholars** ** "^to** ** hasty and fantastic conclusions **

**concerning re-strikes. Among Dr. Mohan's interesting conclusions: The Greeks **

**used Kharoshthi in preference to Brahmi for the same reason the British preferred **

**the Persian script over "the descendants of the Brahmi script" - "in defiance **

**of** ** ttie** ** popular sentiments." He divides the deities on the coins into City and **

**Family types» providing "clues to locate the mint city" and associating the ruler **

**with "one or the other of the two feuding Indo-Greek ruling families." He **

**claims minting was done by contracting firms whose monograms, like trademarks, **

**were inherited in some cases. In conclusion, he attempts a "fresh reconstruction **

**of Euthydemid genealogy" and the "House of Eukratides." An appendix explains **

**Greek deities to Indian students, and a bibliography lists 81 references. The **

**plates illustrate 46 coins and 143 monograms. The author heads the Department **

**of Sanskrit, QoTsnutent Co\|.lege, Ludhiana. **