# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY JANUARY. 1979 OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 12

# THE OTTOMAN COINAGE OF TILIMSAN by Dr. Henri Arroyo

# INTRODUCTION

As t h e i r power grew, the osmanli sultans struck coins in some towns remote from t h e i r metropolis. The products of these provincial mints normally conform to the pattern l a i d down by the central a u t h o r i t i e s so that the appearance at Tilimsan on the western limits of the Ottoman Empire, of a very unorthodox type of coinage deserves some a t t e n t i o n.

The paper deals with only the coins for which the a t t r i b u t i o n i s beyond any doubt. I t w i l l not therefore cover the Ziyanid coins bearing the name of Suleyman and t e n t a t i v e l y ascribed by Hazard ( l ) to the tenth Ottoman Sultan,

# HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

In AH 657/1236 AD a Berber named Yaghmurasan established in Tilimsan the Ziyanid dynasty (named after Ziyan, an ancestor of Yaghmurasan), The M a r i r ' i s of Morocco held the town between 737 and 749/1337 and 1343 and the Hafsids of Tunisia between 753 and 769^352-1359 but the Ziyanids were the predominate power over some three centuries, providing 29 r u l e r s. The l a s t decade of t h i s period was marked by a slow decay of the dynasty and Tilimsan's importance faded as the Spanish took Gran in 915/1509 and the Ottomans Algiers in 92^1516, When the Ziyanid r u l e r Abu-^Abd-allah Muhammad VII died in the l a t t e r year, his chosen successor Abu-Ziyan Ahmad I I was ousted, with Spanish a s s i s t a n c e, by Abu-Hammu Musa I I I, Ahmad called on the Ottomans for help and Aruj Barbarossa removed Musa, k i l l e d Ahmad but was then k i l l e d himself when the Spanish intervened in 921/1518 and set Musa's brother Abu-Muhammad 'Abd-allah I I on the Ziyanid throne. He was followed by his son Abu-'Abd-Allah Muhammad VIII who was temporarily displaced by Khair-al-din Barbarossa, then Ottoman governor of A l g i e r s, in favour of Abu-Ziyan Ahmad I I I, In 957/1550 Ottoman influence again intervened to appoint Abu-Muhammad Hasan, as the Ziyanid r u l e r but in 961/1556 the pretence was abandoned and he was replaced by an Ottoman Agha, Hasan fled to the comparative safety of Spanish Oran but died of the plague shortly afterwards. His son moved to Spain and became a c h r i s t i a n taking the name of Carlos, **i'^tj^." ** **y^.-** **?** ** i^' ** **' ** >^

#. -A **» ** ***i*** ** 1 ** **•«»'i ** Abü^Abd Allah Muhammad VI

Abu Hammu. Musa I I I 922-934 AH 1516-1528 AD (25)

# '•V-,

Abu Muhammad 'Abd-Allah I I 934-947 AH 1528-15^^0 AD (26)

Abu 'Abd-Allah Muhammad VII 910-922 AH 1505-1 51 6 AD **(23) ** Abu Ziyan Ahmad I I 922-924 AH 1516-1518 AD **(24) **

Abu 'Abd-Allah Muhammad VIII 947-949 AH 1540-1543 AD **(27) ** Abu Ziyan Ahmad I I I 949-957 AH 1543-1550 AD Abu Muhammad Hasan 957-964 AH 1550-1556 AD ( 28) ( 29) The Last Ziyanid Rulers
# DESCRIPTION OF THE COINS

The Ottoman coinage of Tilimsan is solely of gold and was struck in the names of three successive rulers of the dynasty of Osman, viz. Selim I I, Murad III and Mehmet I I I,

- In the name of Selim n  (11th Ottoman Sultan: 974-982/1566-1574) - 1 specimen reported by Kocaer (2), Edhem (3) and Artuk ( 4 ). (Fig, l ). Obverse field: in a double square enclosed in a double circle:

**-^jjlj** * ^* ^1^ ** li^yj** possessor of the victory

- • • •.... O I ** v;^Jf** ^  and justice and (?) **^ V** ** -** X * ^* A\>.J «.% Selim, son **o **

Obverse margin: in the four segments between the square and the circle:

***/jOVj^*** *** *** ***/j*** '\*» ' ^ j \* \* ^ ^ Fifteen qirats * \> *

I \|f r * * */* *** y^^fsï*** « t may his victory be strengtheneV974.

On the second line of this field, Kocaer and Artuk read: (_j\-oV-«u»> which is meaningless, I favour the reading: * * *f^^* * \\^ \\L * *\\* Khaqan,

Reverse field: in a double square enclosed in a double circle: \)LULuJI the Sultan

## I

*^* *\\* *^* *\\* *\\ * **%N** l i r ^ \* \* ^ ^ *** t%\\*** ** L ^ t J U w i l** of the Sultan Suleyman,

# o^^i^U king of two continents

>0 I M J J S % t ^ **r^\*^^** ** 9** ^'"'^ ^ ^ ^\*° seas, and Syria \* s V * * *•\* * and of the two Iraqs; may God perpetuate his reign. Reverse margins: in Tilimsan in the year four/ \*• ^ >»-

**,** ** ** **%** ** ** **^** ** ** **\|** ** ** **,** ** ** **^** ** ** **^** ** ** **,** ** ** **«** ** ** **r** ** ** **f** ** ** **. /** *** ^^^*** ** seventy/and nine hundred. ** --- **- ** **- -**

-  In the name of Murad III (1 2th Sultan: 982-1003/1574-1595)

One specimen described by Schaendlinger in the München Staatliche Münzsammlung dated 978 (5). One specimen illustrated by Ölçer (6) with the date 983. One specimen reported by S. Lane-Poole (7) of the year 988. Two specimens described by Soret (8) dated 989 and 995. This author quotes a similar undated coin reported by Moeller who ascribed it to the Moroccan Sharif s. One specimen from the Copenhagen Cabinet published by S. Lane-Poole (9). Two specimens in the American Numismatic Society collection dated 995

and 99.. (lO). One specimen in the author's collection with the date 995 (Fig.2). Obverse field: in a double square enclosed in a double circle:

## I possessor of **(?) **

# ^ **olAÜI ** the sultan Murad son of the Sultan Selim,

Obverse margin / ^ / ••'•\*• / f In the year/. **» 1 •• ** and ninety / and nine hundred. Reverse field: similar to the previous coin.

Reverse margins as the obverse margin but with the units readable: five

On the second line of the obverse field Lane-Poole originally read:

I \>oül but then changed i t to: \>: i \_ ^ l ) c! > ^ '

"The Just Assisted (by G-od)?. Though not very satisfactory, no better reading has so far come to the attention of the author. Soret's suggestion

of ^ • w^»\_Juo oij I \\A\_5U I seems grammatically incorrect,

-  In the name of Mehmet I I I (13th Sultan: 1003-1012/1595-1603). One specimen in the A.N.S. collection (10) dated 1013 (sic I ) Another in the author's collection: date erased. (Fig.3) --- - - -;) (Continued),

Obverse field: in a double square enclosed in a circle \*f\*- ir 1 ^ possessor of the victory

# JjU •••••••• • • ('). I I L I - » J \| the sultan Mehmet son of the sultan Murad, erse margin:......... / ^ L - t in the year / /

## ten/ **^ •aiS ** Reverse field: similar to the previous coins. Reverse margin:. > -%;«,\\ Ditto

far no-one has provided a convincing reading of the 2 lines of the -verse f i e l d l e f t uninterpreted.

# COMMENTARY

us dating 10 years after the Ottoman conquest we see appearing in Tilimsan tween the years 974 and 1012 AH an Ottoman coinage very different in style

that struck in Turkey or even in a similarly distant provincial mint like Algiers. These co ns are distinguished by their unusual Maghribi calligraphy and the type has a family likeness to the coins previously issued 'om this mint by the Ziyanids, This peculiarity is probably due to the use

local die engravers accustomed to the earlier style of dies. --- **- ** **- -** COMt.ïENTARY (Continued)

There are other local p e c u l i a r i t i e s worth noting. Apart from the s o l i t a r y niece of Selim I I, the coins do not show the s u l t a n ' s accession date;.s: s the rule but follow the example of Algiers in displaying the actual date. Earlier Ziyaiiid coins were undated. The use of "°eaiTf' instead of "sanah" for t!"-' word year, is a well-attested practice in North Africa on for example, the gold coins of the Almoravids or the contemporary coinage of the Hasani Sharifs of Morocco where the two words are used concurrently.

The use of the t i t l e "Khagan" on the coin of Selim I I if that i s the correct reading of the legend, i s ap'^arently the e a r l i e s t occurrence on an Ottoman coin. The so-called "Formula B" of Lane-Poole i s not recorded in the British Museum Catalogue e a r l i e r than Murad I I I, The same piece bears the ^pncT Ination of 15 qirats and Sauvaire ( l l ) defines the qirat as l/20th of a l i n i r. The view could therefore be advanced that t h i s issue was made of debased gold and was current for 15 rather than the normal 20 q i r a t s. In that CTse i t would represent the only known instance of a coin indicating i t s r e a l rftl-.er than i t s theoretical value.

All these points indicate the i s o l a t i o n of Tilimsan from the Ottoman world and this is emphasised by the minting in 1013 of a coin bearing the name of a r u l e r who died in 1012. What i s perhaps more puzzling is the sudden cessation of minting after that date. Could this be due to the r i s i n g influence of Algiers eclipsing Tilimsan and removing the need for a mint? Hopefully new finds will provide an answer to the problem.

# BIBLIO&RAHiY

1, HAZARD H.W. the numismatic h i s t o r y of l a t e medieval North Africa, New York. 195'".

2.  KOCAER R. Osmanli Altirikri. Istanbul 1972.

5.  EDHEM H. Meskukati osmaniye Catalogu. Istanbul 1564,

4, ARTUK I. C. Ist'inbul arkeoloji muzeleri teshirdeki islami sikktJler Catalofxi. Vol, I I, Istanbul 1974,

5, SCHAENDLINGER A.C. Osmanische numismatik, Braunschweig, 1973,

| 6, | OLCER C. | Sovyet rusya muzelerindeki nadir osmanli p a r a l a r i, | Istanbul. | 1972, |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| I, | LANE-POOLE S. | Catalogue of the Oriental Coins in the B r i t i s h | Musetmi. | Vol, VIII. |
| 8, | SORET F. | Lettre a Monsieur le Conseiller d'etat de Dorn, Rev, Num. | Beige, | 2iëme s ö r i e V I, p.129. 1856. |

*I,* LANE-POOLE S. Catalogue of the Oriental Coins in the B r i t i s h Museum. Vol, VIII.

8, SORET F. Lettre a Monsieur le Conseiller d'etat de Dorn, Rev, Num. Beige, 2iëme s ö r i e V I, p.129. 1856.

4, LANE-POOLE S. Oriental Coins in the Copenhagen cabinet. Num. Chron.XVI new s e r. p.267. 1876. 10.  BATES A. Personal communication.

I I. SAIVAIRE H. Materi-ux pour servir a i'hir.toire de la Numismatique et de la Metrologie Musulmanes. P a r i s 188'', --- **- ** **- -** COMf.IENTARY (Continued)

There are other local p e c u l i a r i t i e s worth noting. Apart from the s o l i t a r y piece of Selim I I, the ':oiiis do not show the s u l t a n ' s accession date f.s: s the rule but follow the example of Algiers in\_displaying the actual date. E a r l i e r Ziyanid coins were undated. The use of '"-^earf' instead of "sanah" for *tYc'* word year, is a well-attested practice in North Africa on for example, the gold coins 'f the Almoravids or the contemporary coinage of the Hasani Sharifs of Morocco where the two words are used concurrently.

The use of the t i t l e "Khagan" on the coin of Selim I I if that i s the correct reading of the legend, is an'-arently the e a r l i e s t occurrence on an Ottoman coin. The so-called "Formula B" of Lane-Poole i s not recorded in the British Museum Catalogue e a r l i e r than Murad I I I, The same piece bears the leiic.T.ination of 15 qirats and Sauvaire ( l l ) defines the qirat as l/20th of a lin ir. The view could therefore be advanced that t h i s issue was made of debased gold and was current for 15 rather than the normal 20 q i r a t s. In that •:ise i t would represent the only known instance of a coin indicating i t s r e a l rótr.er than i t s theoretical value.

All these points indicate the isolation of Tilimsan from the Ottoman world and this is emphasised by the minting in 1013 of a coin bearing the *narr.e* of a r u l e r who died in 1012. What i s perhaps more puzzling is the sudden cessation of minting after that date. Could t h i s be due to the r i s i n g influence of Algiers eclipsing Tilimsan and removing the need for a mint? Hopefully new finds will provide an answer to the problem.

# BIBLIO&RAHiY

1. HAZARD H.W. the numismatic h i s t o r y of l a t e medieval North Africa, New York. 195r-.?. KOCAER R. Osmanli Altirikri. Istanbul 1972.

'. EDHEM H. Meskukati osmaniye Catalogu. Istanbul 136V.

*4.* ARTUK I. * ^* C. Ist'inbul arkeoloji muzeleri teshirdeki islami sikKtJler Catalogu. Vol, I I, Istanbul 1974.

5, SCHAENDLINGER A.C. Osmanische numismatik. Braunschweig, 1973.

6, OLCER C. Sovyet rusya muzelerindeki nadir osmanli p a r a l a r i. Istanbul. 1972.

*\\* LANE-POOLE S. Catalogue of the Oriental Coins in the B r i t i s h Museum. Vol, VIII.

8, SORET F. Lettre a Monsieur le Conseiller d ' e t a t de Dorn, Rev, Num. Beige, 2ième s ö r i e V I, p.129. 1856.

*'^.* LANE-POOLE S. Oriental Coins in tne Copenhagen cabinet. Num. Chron.XVI new ser. p.267. 1876. 10.  BATES A. Personal communication.

" 1. SA-IYAIRE H. Mater'i-ux pour servir a i ' h i s t o i r e de la Numisraatique et de la Metrologie Musulmanes. Paris 188<'. --- **-** ** b** ** -**

## o