# ORIENTAL N U M I S M A T I C SOCIETY October 1993

# OCCASIONAL PAPER No. 30

# THE ANCIENT INDIAN COINAGE OF ERAN

# A FASCINATING NEW HOARD

## by W.H. Pieper

Published Records of Eran coins In 1874-5, General Alexander Cunningham visited Eran, a famous site of great antiquity, situated in modem eastern Malwa in central India. He found it to be an important source of a series of attractive and well executed ancient punchmarked copper coins. Besides these uninscribed punchmarked coins Cunningham also found 3 inscribed coins of a different nunting technique, 2 of them bearing the inscription * Erakanya,* which he interpreted as a name for Eran, and the third bearing the inscription *Dharmpalasa,* probably the name of a local ruler. (ASI report X, 1880 XXIV, 15-17). Most of the specimens of other than pvinchmarked technique, previously attributed to Eran, have since been transferred to Eran's famous neighbour Ujjain. The Cunningham coins are today in the British Museum, London. They were published by Allan in 1936 in his * BMC -* Coins of Andent India, which lists 33 Eran coins in all, representing 16 different types.

Mitchiner's catalogues * \[Oriental Coins - The Ancient * *and* * Classical* * World,* 1978, and * Indo-Greek* * and Indo-* *Scythian* * Coinage,* Vol. 9,1976) present a repetition of the * BMC* coins with the addition of a few very interesting new types from his own collection.

In 1962 B. Jain published 18 more coins of Eran in the * Journal* * of* * the* * Numismatic* * Society* * of* * India* and in 1988 S.K. Bhatt and Narendra Singh presented a new type of inscribed coin, which they attributed to Eran *\{fourrtal* * of the Academy of Indian Numismatics & * *Sigillography,* Vol. VI).

Apart from the above mentioned references I have no knowledge of any other publications of Eran coins, with the exception of some single specimens occurring in dealers' lists from time to time.

Historical Background The decline of the great Mauryan Empire, beginning with Ashoka's death in c.232 BC, gave way to the autonomy of a number of different kingdoms and democratic or aristocratic so-called "Tribal - States" in northern and central India. It seems, however, as if Malwa with its important civic centres of Ujjain, Vidisa and Eran remained under the rule of the Shungas, the successors of the Mauryas. But the very distinctive coinages of Ujjain and Eran each with a characteristic style of its own, so absolutely different from the uniform imperial Shunga coinage, might be an indication that both these cities - states had at least some degree of independence - perhaps with only a titular overlordship by the Shungas. The time of the emission of the Eran coinage cannot be fixed precisely, but, from the above, it seems probable that it was sometime during the 2nd century BC In any case it came to an end when the mighty Satavahana rulers were incorporating the Malwa region into their empire in the early 1st century BC. A few Eran coins with Satavahana inscriptions confirm this historical event (see Addenda V).

Characteristics of the Eran Coinage If confronted with a new type of uninscribed coin the question always arises, what allows one to attribute the coin to a cjertain ruler or area? If we have clear infonnation concerning the provenance, then this can be a very strong and helpful hint. In the case of a hoard this is even more so than in the case of a single coin find, because the chance of finding a single coin far from its place of origin is
Pieper Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional P^er 30

certainly greater than in the case of a whole hoard. Unfortunately in most cases the exact provenance remains unknovkm so that, to begin with, we have to base our attribution on other features like striking technique, metal, form, weight, design, symbolism and stylistic peculiarities. If we leave aside the very few specimens bearing an inscription relating them to Eran, but otherwise untypical in style and technique, we can list some characteristics for the (uninscribed) coinage of Elran:

In all cases the shape of the coins is square, the metal is copper and in nearly all cases the coins are produced by the punchmarking technique. The last-mentioned feature is a very important one because there are very few copper coin series of ancient India struck using the punchmarking technique, in contrast to the overwhelming number of punchmarked silver coins. Characteristically the reverses of the coins of Eran are plain -if however there is a reverse type, it is one that really belongs to the obverse type or it is the remains of an old undertype, as is the case with some coins of this hoard.

The obverse types are combinations of a number of different, carefully placed punches, usually five or four but sometimes only three; one new t)rpe in the hoard has only two punchmarks. As far as the design is concerned the coiners used animals and symbols mostly well known for other ancient Indian coins. The commonest on the Elran coinage are elephant, horse, so-called Ujjain-symbol (when used as a prominent reverse type we should call this a cross with four circles on the ends of the cross, typical for Ujjain), river-symbol, standard in railing, tree in railing, flower with eight petals. But as the following list shows we find some more symbols on the coins of Eran in addition to those mentioned above:

elephant Well known on Indian coins through the ages. horse Rare on the other indigenous coinage of ancient India.

bull, Hitherto rare for Eran; some new types in the hoard. lion Hitherto known only on one specimen illustrated by Mitchiner, MAC 4617, but the lion was not recognised and described.

A second specimen is now known from the hoard. "Ujjain symbol" Cross with circles on the four ends of the cross. Occurring on many ancient Indian coins, particularly on those of Ujjain, Eran and the Satavahana rulers. 6-aTmed symbol Circle from which radiate alternately 3 curved arrow-heads and t a u r i n e symbols. Frequently used on andent Indian coins and on the early silver punchmarked coinage.

taurine symbol Circle with curved lines projecting like the horns of a bull; on Eran coins typically framed by an open semi-circle. river symbol Two wavy lines, parallel to each other, with varying combinations of swimming aquatic animals, swastikas and taurine symbols; frequently found on the coins of Eran and on those of Ujjain.

tree in railing Tree rises from an enclosure, the enclosure being subdivided by a varying number of compartments. A symbol commonly found on andent Indian coins. standard in railing standard wheel

Triangular-headed standard rising from an enclosure, the endosure being subdivided into a varying number of compartments. Also found on other andent Indian coins.

The same triangular-headed standard without railing. There are a few coins with a wheel symbol in Michael Mitchiner's collection attributed by him to Eran. An unusual variety showing an eight-spoked wheel with eight protuberances projecting from the rim, thus symbolising Vishnu's discweapon, the Chakra, occurs once in the hoard and is new for Eran.
**Piq\>er Eran Hoard ** **Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional Paper 30 ** flower

with 8 petals Seems to be specific for Eran. closed semicircle

with 2 fish inside Specific for Eran. closed semicircle

with 2 crosses inside Specific for Eran. 3-arched hill 3 semicircles forming a hill. Usually this is a very common symbol on the coinage of andent India On Eran coins it is unknown except in a variety with a plant rising from the top of the hill occurring on a few coins in Michael Mitchiner's collection attributed by him to Eran.

There are many variations in the formation of some of these symbols. In particular the Ujjainsymbol appears in a number of differing forms.

Furthermore there are different combinations of the animals and objects swimming in the river and the railings of the trees and standards are sometimes subdivided into 4,6,8 or a maximum of 9 compartments. When presenting the hoard coins on the following pages these variations can clearly be seen on the accompanying drawings for each type.

As far as sizes and weights of the Eran coins are concerned it seems difficult to find a characteristic standard. One type in the hoard has 13 specimens ranging from 3.2 to 9.7 gr with sizes from 1.5 x 1.5 cm up to 2.2 x 2.4 cm. The majority of the Eran coins seem however to have a weight somewhere in the 5 to 7 gr range with an average size of perhaps 2x2 cm.

Keeping in mind all the possible exceptions from the rule we would expect the * typical Eran coin* to be a relatively large square, carefully punchmarked, copper coin with a plain reverse. The number of the punchmarks is usually fovir or five, never more and sometimes less, representing combinations of animals and symbolic designs, each punchmark occurring only once on a coin. Symbols which seem to be specific for Eran are the flower with eight petals, the closed semicircular symbol with two crosses inside and the open semicircular sjmibol with a taurine symbol inside All the 9ther symbols are also to be found on other ancient Indian coins,

especially on those of Eran's nei^bour Ujjain, their occurrence however on a punchmarked coin is good evidence for its attribution to Eran unless there is some other factor against it. Ujjain coins typically are die-struck coins with a great "Ujjain symbol" on the reverse. 1 do not know a single case where an Ujjain coin has been struck by the punchmarking technique. Having said all this I think it will be unnecessary to give detailed reasons for my attributions of the different hoard coins.

Analysis of the Hoard The present hoard comprises 74 copper coins of Eran with a few Ujjain coins among them. 1 bought it as a complete lot from a specialist dealer and as it has not been 'cherry-picked' it can be assumed that it is as complete as one could hope for. Usually hoards in India and Pakistan tend to get parcelled and separated quickly and it is rare for them to arrive intact at the bazaars and museums. We have therefore to thank the efforts of the dealer who, besides being a higjily knowledgable numismatist, is always ready to advise and encourage other research and collecting activities, often at the expense of a quick profit. As is usually the case, nothing can be said about the exact provenance of the hoard. Out of the total of 74 coins, 22 specimens are too poor for any attribution. The other 52 coins are mostly in a nice and sometimes beautiful state of preservation and represent 22 different types of which 11 types seem to be unpublished so far.

The analysis of the hoard follows Allan's classification * \[BMQ.* He listed 15 different types of the uninscribed Eran coins calling them variety A up to variety O. Among these 15 * BMC* types there are 5 types which stylistically seem to be more closely connected with Ujjain than with Eran (varieties A, C, M, N, O) and it seems justifiable to attribute them to Ujjain as Mitchiner partly does. This coincides with the fact that these 5 doubtful types are totally absent from this relatively large hoard, whereas most of the other Eran coin types from the * BMC* catalogue are well represented.

Breaking down the hoard coins into the * BMC * varieties (with the hoard coins in parentheses) gives us the following coin types. --- Pieper Eran Hoard

**Type 1** * * *BMC* var. B, no. 3 (Hoard nos 1-6) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * 3 punchmarks:

Standard, Ujjain symbol, tree in railing Traces of die-struck undertype:

Bull to r., standard in railing, wavy line with fish above and below 5.0; 5.0; 6.5; 6.0; 5.9; 7.3 gr 1.8 X 1.8; 2.2 x 1.9; 1.9 x 1.8; 2.2 x 2.2; 2.2 x 1.9; 2.2 x 2.2 cm.

The obverse punchmarks on the six coins show the same arrangement, only on one specimen the position of the tree in railing varies. On one specimen we see traces of an undertype on the obverse as well, i.e. one orb of an Ujjain symbol and also traces of a railing. The reverses of the six coins show different parts of an old die-struck undertype of Ujjain style, consisting of a bull with long curved horns to r. and triangular-headed standard in railing to the right of the bull. On one reverse side we furthermore find traces of a wavy line with fish above and below it. The next type (2) provides an explanation for this. Type 2 *BMC -* (Hoard nos 7-8) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * Die-struck:

Bull to r., standard in railing on right, wavy line with fish above and below it, wavy line on the bottom Die-struck:

Ujjain symbol 5.7; 4.9 gr 1.8 X 1.8; 2.1 and 1.8 cm.

Oriental Numismatic Sodöy Occasional * Papa* 30 Type 3 * * *BMC* - (Hoard nos 9-10) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * Die-struck: Bull to r., standard above Die-struck:

Small circle with four nandipadas around it 8.5; 4.3 gr 1.9 X 1.9; 2.1 X 1.8 cm.

The two coins of this type are in a poor state of preservation but the main features can be recognised and the type seems to be unpublished. The reverse symbol occurs only once in the * BMC* catalogue as a more elaborate variant but with a completely different obverse type under Eran, var. O. I would attribute it to Ujjain.

**Type 4 ** *BMC* var. D, nos 5-6 **(Hoard** nos 11-15) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * *5* punchmarks:

8-petal flower, tree in railing, standard in railing, Ujjain symbol, river with swimming objects Plain 4.4; 5.0; 5.5; 5.5; 6.0 gr 1.6 X 1.6; 1.8 X 1.8; 1.8 x 1.8; 1.9 x 1.7; 1.9 x 1.8 cm.

Again it is remarkable how on these five coins each punch was set carefully on the flan, so as not to damage the other punchmarks, and the position of each punchmark was exactly maintained. One coin (no. 16) is of lower weight and smaller size leaving space for only three punchmarks. Although the form of the tree on this item differs from that on the other coins of this type, it is not probable that this coin was intended as a tyfie of its own.

This is obviously an unpublished Ujjain coin type. Allan lists a similar coin under Eran as var. C, no. 4. More or less worn specimens of this coin served as undertypes for the Eran coin type 1.
Pieper Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Sodety Occasional Paper 30 Type 5 * * *BMC -* (Hoard nos 16-17) ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** ***Sizes *** *5* punchmarks:

As type 4 but elephant instead of Ujjain symbol Plain 5.7; 8.8 gr 2.0 X 1.8; 2.5 x 2.5 cm.

This beautiful coin occurs as two specimens in the hoard, one of which Is in a perfect condition with a nice brown patina, and also seems to be unpublished. Type 6 *BMC* var F, no. 9 (Hoard nos 18-19) ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** ***Sizes *** *5* punchmarks:

Horse, tree in railing, standard in railing, Ujjain symbol, river with swimming objects Plain 8.8; 9.7 gr 2.2 X 2.2; 2.5 x 2.3 cm.

the hoard, a fact which coincides with Allan's listing, who presents 6 items of this type. Here again we can state that the placement of the different punches has been done with considerable carefulness. Only in one case is there a slight change in the position of the Ujjain symbol. Four coins are of smaller size and lower weight (nos 29-32), leaving insufficient space for the complete four punches. Types *BMC* var. H, nos 16-18

## (Hoard nos 33-34) **1** ** ** **^ ** ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** ***Sizes *** 4 punchmarks:

8-petal flower, tree in railing, Ujjain symbol, semicircle with 2 fish inside and 2 swastikas and 1 taurine symbol above no. 33: Ujjain symbol punchmark no. 34: Ujjain symbol punchmark and semicircle punchmark 4.5; 4.9 gr 1.8 X 1.9; 1.9 X 1.9 cm.

It looks as if worn specimens of this type had been used as blanks with the same type punched freshly on the former reverse

This type, of which Allan lists only one piece, occurs as two specimens in the hoard. Another one, in an extremely fine grade, is in the author's collection (see Addenda 1). **Type 9** * * *BMC* var. J, nos 21-25 (Hoard no. 35) **Type 7 ** ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** **Sizes ** *BMC* var. G, nos 10-15 (Hoard nos 20-32) 4 pxmchmarks:

Horse, elephant, Ujjain symbol, river with swinrmning objects Plain

3.2; 3.8; 4.0; 4.9; 5.0; 5.2; 5.5; 5.9; 6.0; 6.7; 6.8;

7.1; 9.7 gr 1.5 X 1.5; 1.5 X 1.5; 1.5 x 1.6; 1.6 x 1.6; 1.8 x 1.9; 1.8 X 1.9; 1.8 x 2.0; 1.8 x ZO; 1.7 x 2.0; 2.0 X 2.0; 2.0 X 1.9; 2.2 x 2.2; 2.2 x 2.4 cm. ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** ***Sizes *** **Type 10 ** ***Obverse *** 5 punchmarks:

**Ftower,** river with swimming objects, 6-armed symbol, standard in railing, tree in railing Plain 5.8 gr 1.4 x 1.7 cm. *BMC* var. K, no. 27 (Hoard nos 36-37)

With 13 specimens this is the best represented type in 5 punchmarks: Elephant, river with swimming objects,
Piq\>ar Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional Pap« 30 *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes *

taurine symtxjl, tree in railing, standard in railing Plain 3.3; 3.9 gr 1.6 X 1.7; 1.7 X 1.7 cm. Type 13

The two hoard coins of this type are of relatively low weight. The type corresponds to Allan's variety K, coin number 27. Coin number 26 however, which Allan also listed under variety K, in fact should be regarded as a variety on its own, corresponding to another specimen in the author's collection (see Addenda 11). Type 11 *BMC-* (Hoard no. 38) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes *

# BMC (Hoard nos 41-43) 5 punchmarks:

Elephant, river with swimming objects, standard in railing, Ujjain symbol with crescent on top of one orb, 6- armed symbol with 3 arrows and 3 nandipadas Plain 4.7; 6.1; 7.9 gr 2.0 X 2.0; 2.0 x 2.0; 2.2 x 2.2 cm.

This type, of which three specimens occur in the hoard, seems to be unpublished; the Ujjain symbol variety also seems to be new. On one of the coins parts of this Ujjain symbol appear on the reverse. *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * *5* punchmarks: As type 10, but Ujjain symbol instead of standard Plain 3.9 gr 1.9 x 1.7 cm.

The special combination of symbols with the replacement of the standard by an Ujjain symbol makes this coin also an xmpublished variety. Type 14 * * *BMC -* (Hoard no. 44) Type 12 *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * *BMC* var. L, nos 28-30 (Hoard nos 39-40) Die-struck:

Semicircle with two crosses inside and Ujjain symbol above; all incuse no. 41: Traces of one punchmark: elephant no. 42: Traoes of four punchmarks: elephant, horse, Ujjain symbol, river with swimming objects 5.1; 5.5 gr 1.7 X 1.8; 2.0 X 2.1 cm.

Obviously this is a case of overpunching one coin type of Eran over another Eran type; judging from the degree of wear probably * BMC* var. L over * BMC* var. G. On the *BMC* coin Eran, no. 29, var. L, we see the same phenomenon. ***Obverse *** *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * 3 punchmarks:

Humped bull, Ujjain symbol, river with swimming objects 2 punchmarks:

Taurine symbol, standard in railing 8.2 gr 2.4 X 2.3 cm.

The coin seems to be unpublished. Although it shows considerable wear, the single punchmarks can be identified. An unusual feature of this coin is that two of the punchmarks are put on the reverse. However there is another Eran coin in the author's collection showing the same imusual feature (see Addenda III). Type 15 *BMC-* (Hoard no. 45) Ofcuerse 4 punchmarks:
Pieper. Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional P^er 30

Humped bull, Ujjain symbol, river with swimming objects, horse *Reverse* Plain *Weights* 4.7 gr **Sizes** 2.0 X 2.0 cm.

This type seems to be unpublished. The bull is a rare

symbol on the Eran coins. As far as the * BMC* coins with

a bull on them are concerned, their attribution to Eran is doubthtl and they probably belong to U\])ain. Type 16 *BMC-* (Hoard no. 46) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * 5 pimchmarks:

River dividing the obverse into two halves; above the river, bull on the left and tree in railing on right, below the river, Ujjain symbol on left and elephant on right Plain 5.6 gr 2.1 X 2.0 cm.

This nice and rare type, of which there is only one specimen in the hoard, also seems to be impublished. Type 17 * * *BMC -, * Mitchiner 4617 (Hoard no. 47) *Obverse* 5 punchmarks:

River dividing the obverse into two halves; above the river, bull on left and elephant on right, l)elow the river, lion on left and Ujjain symbol on right

| Reverse | Plain |
|:--- |:--- |
| Weights | 7.3 gr |
| Sizes | 2.0 X 2.0 cm. | *Weights* 7.3 gr **Sizes ** **2.0** ** X** ** 2.0** cm. **Type 18 ** *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes *

# BMC (Hoard no. 48) 2 punchmarks: 8-petal flower.

# 1 w 8-spoked wheel with protuberances projecting from the rim Traces of a worn 7.2 gr 2.1 X 2.0 cm. punchmark

The typ\>e seems to be impublished. It is a very rare and unusual coin with only two punchmarks but what is most tinusual is the fact that one of these symbols represents the 8-spoked wheel with the eight protuberances projecting from the rim, thus symbolising Vishnu's Chakra, a military weapon and a solar symbol as well (O. Gidllaume, 1991, * Graeco-Bactrian and Indian * *coins from Afghanistan,* p. 85). It occurs in a variant on a few rare drachms of the Indo-Greek king Agathokles and on a few Ujjain coins. Up to now it had been unknown for any Eran coin! The symbol on Mitchiner's Eran coins nos 4615 and 4618-4619 does not have these peculiarities, so it has to be regarded as a simple wheel. **Type 19 ** *BMC-* (Hoard no. 49) *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * 3 punchmarks: Standard, Ujjain symbol, 6-armed symbol Plain 2.0 gr 1.3 X 1.2 cm.

The type seems to be unpublished. For an Eran coin it

has a remarkable small size and low weight. Perhaps it

belongs to the Ujjain series although the punchmarking

technique makes the attribution to Eran more probable.

Although this rare coin is in a nice state of preservation,

the most interesting punchmark comes out a bit weak. ** ** **Type 20** * * *BMC -* But nevertheless there can be no doubt that it represents (Hoard no. 50)

a lion - a symbol which up to now had l)een unknown

for any Eran coin! Mitchiner * \[Ancient and Cbssical* * World, * 1978. illustrates this type under Eran as no. 4617, but he

does not describe it adequately and above all he does not mention the important representation of a lion. * * *Obverse* Die-struck:
Piqjer Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional P^er 30

Horse, river, tree in railing, Ujjain symbol and swastika - all incuse. ***Reverse*** ** ** **Plain ** ***Weights*** ** ** **3.9 gr ** Sizes 1.3 X 1.5 cm.

The technique and the style make the attribution to Ujjain probable. Furthermore there is another Ujjain coin in the author's collection which has almost the same obverse type but a large Ujjain symbol on the reverse (see Addenda IV).

Type 21 * * *BMC* Ujjain, pl. XXXVI, no. 8 (Hoard no. 51) ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** *Sizes * Die-struck:

Elephant to r., tree in railing on r., 6-armed symtx)l Die-struck: Ujjain-symbol 3.1 gr 1.6 X 1.2 cm.

This is a well known Ujjain coin type of which one worn specimen is part of the hoard.

Type 22 * * *BMC* * -,* Mitchiner vol. 9, no. 1203 (Hoard no. 52) 9, no. 1203.

Addenda There are some more Eran coins in the author's collection, which are not part of the hoard, but which have been mentioned above and which are here illustrated and described. *BMC* var. F, Eran coin ***Obverse *** ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** ***Sizes *** 5 punchmarks:

River with swimming objects, horse, Ujjain symbol, tree in railing, standard in railing Plain 9.7 gr 2.2 X 2.3 cm.

This coin was bought some years ago as a singleton. The state of preservation is exceptional and it has a beautiful green patina. II *BMC* var. K, no. 26, Eran coin *Obverse* 5 pimchmarks:

River with swimming objects, elephant, taurine symbol, standard in railing, 6-armed symbol with 3 arrow-heads and nandipadas ***Reverse*** ** ** **Plain ** ***Weights*** ** ** **8.0 gr ** Sizes 2.1 X 2.1 cm. Oiii«rse ***Reverse *** ***Weights *** ***Sizes *** Die-struck:

Bull to r., tree in railing, human figure on r river below, standard above the bull Die-struck: Ujjain symbol 4.8 gr 1.9 X 1.5 cm.

| This is a specimen of an Ujjain coin type illustrated by | Mitchiner in his Indo-Greek and Indo-SofOiian coinage, VoL |
|:--- |:--- |
| This also was a single coin purchase some years ago. It | exactly corresponds to the BMC Eran coin, var. K, no. 26. |
| Ill | BMC - |
| ObtCTse | 2 punchmarks: |

This also was a single coin purchase some years ago. It exactly corresponds to the * BMC* Eran coin, var. K, no. 26. **Ill** *** *** ***BMC -*** ObtCTse 2 punchmarks: Horse, 6-armed symbol with 3 arrow-heads
*Piepar.* Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional Paper 30 *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * and 3 fish each in a triangle 3 punchmarks;

River with swimming objects, symbol, standard 7.0 gr 2.4 X 2.2 cm. Ujjain

This seems to be an unpublished Eran coin type. It was purchased in 1990 and, reportedly, was a single find. It is a rare and brilliant coin. An unusual feature is that it is punched on obverse and reverse as well - a phenomenon occurring only on one coin in the hoard, i.e. type 14.

# IV *BMC-* *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes *

# T O

## ^ Die-struck:

Horse, tree in railing, Ujjain symbol, swastika, wavy line with two fish above and two fish below - all incuse Ujjain symbol 8.9 gr 2.0 X 1.5 cm.

This is an Ujjain coin from the author's collection. A similar coin with a much lower weight and smaller size has been described above as hoard type 20. *Obverse * *Reverse * *Weights * *Sizes * *BMC-, * Mitchiner. vol. 9, no. 1311 5 punchmarks:

River with swimming objects, 3-arched hill, Ujjain symbol, standard in railing, inscription: * Rano Siri Satakanisa * Plain 3.1 gr 1.9 X 1.7 cm.

This is an example of an Eran styled Satavahana coin. It came to the author's collection in 1990 together with a few other Satavahana coins and, reportedly, had been foimd in the Naimada valley region. At the time of the emission of this coin Eran had been incorporated into the growing Satavahana empire.
PiepCT: Eran Hoard Oriental Numismatic Society Occasional P£(\>er 30

## Conclusions

1 With a total number of 74 coins including 52 identifiable specimens this is ** the ** **largest hoard of Eran coins** having come to light so far.

2 The content of the hoard shows a great variety. Among its ** 22 different types ** there are 5 Ujjain types, the great majority however are of typical Eran style. To the author's knowledge ** 11 types are unpublished** - 3 new types for Ujjain and as many as 8 new types for Eran.

3 The arrangement of the different punchmarks on the flan generally has been done with great care.

4 The state of preservation is ranging from perfect to poor. A classification relative to the age, being based on the different degrees of wear, seems however to be too speculative.

5 Among the many symbols occurring on the coins there are two deserving special attention: ** the lion and the 8-spoked wheel** the last having 8 protuberances projecting from the rim - obviously a representation of god Vishnu's disc-weapon, the Chakra.

6 ** The bull,** formerly a rare symbol on Eran coins, is now known from several new types in the hoard.

7 More or less worn specimens of certain ** Ujjain coins have been overpunched by ** **Eran coiners** (see Type 1 and 2).

8 ** Worn Eran coins have been punched anew** with the obverse-punchmarks on the plain reverse (see Type 8).

9 There are cases of ** punching one Eran coin type over another Eran coin type** (see Type 12).

10 In some extremely rare cases ** the punchmarks of a certain coin type are ** **distributed among both obverse and reverse** (see Type 14 and Addenda III). --- 1. Type 1 2. Type 1  3. Type 1 4. Type 1  5. Type 1  7. Type 2 11. Type 4  12. Type 4  16. Type 5 20. Type 7  21. Type 7  24. Type 7 25. Type 7  26. Type 7  29. Type 7 30. Type 7  33. Types  34. Types --- 36. Type 10  37. Type 10  38. Type 11 41. Type 13  42. Type 13  45. Type 15 46. Type 16  47. Type 17  48. Type 18 49. Type 19  50. Type 20  52. Type 22 Addenda I Addenda II Addenda III obv. Addenda III rev.

Galata Pnnt Ud, OW White Lion, Uantyllin, Powys SY22 5BX