# Ö^S *öcue..* * ^oMTL^* / ^ 2-^

# BOOK IN PRIlfr - AHABIC HÜHI3MATIC3

**A problem common to most collectors of oriental coins is that of acquiring copies ** **of the essential books. Specialist bibliographies are most useful In describing ** **the books and articles vhlch exist but all too often it proves Impossible to ** **actually find a copy for sale. The following list has been prepared to show only ** **books idilch ve believe to be available now. In general ONS can supply them but ** **the position can change overnight as very small stocks are held by most book-** **sellers.** ** Books priced in dollars can be obtained directly from the ANS. Postage ** **extra. **

**Lane Poole, S Catalogue of Oriental Coins in the British Museua 10 vols. London ** **1875-90 reprinted Bologna 1967 (reduced slee) £12.50 per vol. **

**The only comprehensive catalogue available for the whole arable series but nearly ** **100 years old and reprinted imohanged. **

**vol,** ** 1 ** **Post-reform Umaiyad and Abbasid. ** **(8 pi.) The Umalycui section has been superseded by Walker'i catalogue Of **

**Huhammaden coins in the B.N. but this has itself Just gone out of ** **print. **

**vol.** ** 2 ** **Spanish Umalyads and their successors; early dynasties of North ** **(8 pi) Africa and Egypt; early Persian and Trans-ozine dynasties. **

**The Spanish section is now covered more fully by Miles (see** ** below)\* **

**vol.** ** 3 ** **Hamdanlds etc., Seljuks, Urtuklds, Zenglds» and Atabegs. ** **(12 pi) **

**vol.** ** 4 ** **Patimids, Ayyubids and Mamluks. ** **(8 pi) The Hamluk series Is dealt with in more detail by Balog (see** ** below). **

**vol.** ** 5 ** **Moors beginning with the Al Moravids and the dynasties of the Temen ** **( pi) ** **from the Rasullds. ** **The North African issues are covered more fully by Hazard (see** ** below). **

| vol. 6 | Mongols from Ghengls Khan to the invasions of Tinar including the | (9 pi.) Jelairs and the Huzzaffarids. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| vol. 7 | Timurids and their successors including the Msngits and the Khans of | (5 pi.) Khl¥a and Ehokand. |
| YOl. 8 | Turks including the Aq-Quyunll and a few pieces of the Mahdi and the | (12 pi) Sultan of Zanzibar. |

**vol.** ** 7 ** **Timurids and their successors including the Msngits and the Khans of ** **(5 pi.) Khl¥a and Ehokand. **

**YOl.** ** 8 ** **Turks including the Aq-Quyunll and a few pieces of the Mahdi and the ** **(12 pi) Sultan of Zanzibar. **

**vol.** ** 9 ** **Additions to vols. 1 to 4 comprising some 2000 coins and including ** **(20 pi) many Aghlablds and Ghaznavids. Also contains Arab-byzantine issues ** **and those of the Ghorids **

**vol.10 ** **Additions to vols. 5 to 8 of some 850 coins including some interesting ** **(l3 pi) Yemeni pieces. Also contains 250 pages of indexes to all 10 volumes ** **giving years, mints (both cross-referenced) and people. **

**Sassanian.GObl S, Sassanlan Numismatics £5.50 **

**English version of original Geroan volume. **

**Arab-sassanian. Walker J, Catalogue of the Arab-Sassanlan coins £5.00 ** **Includes much on Sassanlan mints and script. ** **Gaube H. Arabosassanidische Numismatlk £12.00. **

**Spanish Umalyads. Miles G.C, The Coinage of the Umayyads of Spain SI0.00 ** **Miles G.C, Coins of the Spanish Muluk Al-Tawa'if 34.50 **

**Saffarlds. Walker J, The Coinage of the Second Saffarid Dynasty in Slstan SI.00 ** **Mainly on the Issues of the Samanld governors. **

**Amirs of Crete, Miles G.C, The Coinage of the Arab Amirs of Crete 84.00 **

**Tulunids. Grabar 0, The Coinage of the Tulunids S3.00 **

**Fatimids. Miles G.C, Patlmid Coins in the Collections of the University ** **Museum Philadelphia and the ANS S2.00 ** **A useful Introduction to the series. **

## f\\/WKSL^ i o ML lé\> (^%i£y /ifp. i)
# BOOKS IN PRIMT - ARABIC NUMISMATICS **(Continued) ** **2. **

**Mamluks.** ** Balog P., The Coinage of the Hamluk Sultans of Egypt and Syria & 35.00 **

**Moors.** ** Hazard H.W., The Numismatic History of Late Medieval North Africa E10.00 ** **Deals with the period AH439 - ca 950 excluding Bgsrpt. **

**Mangits etc. Torrey C.C., Gold Coins pf Khokand and Bukhara El.00 ** **13 coins from AH1233-1285 **

**Ottomans. Sultan J., The Ever Victorious £1.00 ** **^^ ** **An introduction to Ottoman coin types. **

H **Olcer C, Tildrim Bayezid'in Ogullarina Ait Akce veKangilar £2.00 ** **^chaendlinger A.C., Osmanischer Numismatik £13.00 ** **General Series. Valentine V.H., Modem Copper Coins of the Huhammaden States £2.25 **

**Zambaur Bv., Die HtbixprAgungen des Islams £12.50 ** **In German but an essential history of all known mints, dates and references. **

**General Reference. Bosworth S.B., The Islamic Dynasties £1.25 **

**The best short guide to names, tribes and potted history. **

**In addition to the books listed above there are a number of useful papers in ** **periodical publications, principedly in:-** **American Numismatic Society Museum Notes **

**available from ANS, Broadway at 156th St., ** **NEW YORK, NT 10032, USA. ** **Back numbers to 1948 (except 1954) at prices from ** **B5.00 to aiO.OO each ** **Numismatic Chronicle **

**available from the Royal Numismatic Society, ** **o/o Dept. of Coins and Medals, British Museum, ** **LONDON WC1. Back numbers to 1964 at £5 each (£4 to** ** Fellows). **

**Please let me know of any books in print on arabic numismatics which are not on ** **this list. Price and source please, **

# A HEJA2 PATTERN RIYAL

**We are indebted to Mr. Whitler for the following interesting note. He can supply ** **copies of the pattern in copper and a few in silver. **

**During the year AH1340^-1** ** (l34l),** ** AD 1922, new coin minting presses from England ** **^ ** **were delivered to the port of Jeddah, then transported by camel oaravan to Mecca. ** **At Mecca, the presses were installed in the Mecca Mint, with British personnel ** **assisting in the installation and in the initial operation of the presses. **

**All of this operation took place under the authority granted by the King of Hejaz, ** **Al Hussein Bin Ali (the great grandfather of the present King of the Hashemite ** **Kingdom of Jordan) who was interested in up-dating and improving the quality of the ** **coinage of Hejaz. **

**After the presses were operational, pattern coins were struck from dies that had ** **been brought from England, The King of Hejaz made the final decision as to which ** **pattern was to be the model for all the Hejaz coinage, and although the pattern we ** **are writing about today was not the pattern selected, to the best of my knowledge ** **it is the only pattern coin to survive. **

**Our pattern, the n40+1 pattern, was struck in copper and in crown size (the size ** **of a silver** ** dollar).** ** It was not struck for circulation, since such a coin would ** **have had to be in silver, being a 20 girsh or 1 riyal denomination. **

**One side of the pattern says "struck in the Year 1340 Hegira in Year 1 of the ** **Hashemite Arabic Government with Capited of Governmort in Holy Mecca," The other ** **side reads "Usage ordered by Al Hussein Bin Ali, His slave and the son of His (God) ** **slave." **