***/ ***

# ANNOTATED STUDIES OF NUMISMATIC INTEREST PUBLISHED BY THE

# " E A S T

A N D W E S T " - QUARTERLY REVIEW OP THE ISTITUTO

# ITALIANO PER IL MEDIO E L'SSTREMO ORIENTS (IsMEO) - Director

Prof, Giuseppe Tucci - Direction: Via Merulana, 248 - OOl85»ROMA.

# PROM\_YEAR\_I\_-\_No\_l\_-\_APRIL\_1950\_TO\_YEAR\_V\_-\_No\_4\_-\_JAm No studies of numismatic interest,

YEAR VI -\_No 2 I\_22ï2?5^\_1955£\_ ' • 1 ) K. Enoki - THE ORIGIN OF THE V/HITE HUNS OR HEPFTHALITES pp, 231-237. Although have no coins illustrated or numismatic direct implements, this study is of general interest also for the numismatist. Having studied a large numher of Hephthalite coins the prof, R. Ghirshman has stated in his great work "LES CHIONITES-HSPHTHALITES" (Cairo, 194B) that their original habitat was in Chinese Turkestan but does not exr»lain in detail why he ulaces it in this lar.^e coun= trjr. Prof. Enoki 'developed bis opinion based on the sltentical analy= sis of the events recorded by the Toba-Wei and Lianp d-'mastic histo= ries. Prof. Ghirshman has studied the inscrintions of the Fephthali= te coins which he has decinhered as EPTLA SHAHO HIO(NO), which in hjs opinion means "T^EPFTHAL, KING OP THE CHION PEOPLE". He explains that Chion was th^ name of the Henhthalite ueople "...and Hephthal the name of their king, but I am rather of the oninion that these irscrintions, if nrof. Ghirshman has read them correctly, should be considered as claiming for the Hephthalite people a Hun origin, or else boasting of Hephthalit«=' conquests in Sogdiana, where the Chi ons formerly reirned, and also their conquests over other tri= bes..."(R.Enoki), The Hephthalite did not originally come from the Altai region beyond Sogdiana, but from the neighbourhood of Tokha= ristan. More precisely their origin should be sought^^in a country called HIIIATALA according to the Chinese pilgrim, Hsuang-tsang (629 A.D.), at the east of Tokharistan, on the upper Oxus, or in the Hindukush mountains. Otherwise Prof. F. Altheim (see:"ALEXAN= DER THE GREAT AFD TÏÏ": AV3STA" - in "East & West" - October 1957) states:"..^.'^hu3 most of these (people) are SAKA tribes. It follows that the Saka dialect of the so-(jailed Hephthalite fragments (see: 0. Hansen in P. Altheim, "AUS SPATANTIKE UND CHRTSTENTUM',' p.85 f;  L4 PAROLA DEL PASSATO, 20 (1961), pp.361 ff.) and of the legends on the Hephthalite coins (see: R. Ghirshman - LES CHIONITES-FEPH= THALITSS (1948); cf.O.Hansen in F. Altheim, 0p.cit.pr).79 f.) cannot be separated from those tribes. The Hephthalite themselves were of Turkish (Hunnic) stock and Turkish language (see: F. Altheim, Op.cit. p.104 f.; Altheim-Stiehl, SIN ASTATISGHER STAAT,1(1954),pn.273 f,K. Enoki, in TÖYO GAKUHO,28,4,1 and SHTGAKU ZASSHI,64(1955),8,n.31f. is still written without knov/ledge of our construction and of our new material). But after their invasion of Sogdiana and Bactria they.s>
•became quickly iranised (see: Altheini-Stiehl,Op, cit,pp.227 f.; 279 f.)....".

2. (Prof.Giuseppe Tucci) - In the Library: Senarat "Paranavi=  tana. Archaeological Commissioner of Ceylon - EPIGRAPHIA ZEYLANI= CA - Vol.y - Oxford 1955, S, Paranavitana Editor at page 102. Prof. Tucci relates briefly on a fascicle of great importance for the Singhalese History and Epigraphy because a long study is dedi= cated to the TAMGOMVIHARA PILLAR INSCRIPTION that gives occasion to the Author to discuss in an Appendix and to revise the Chronolo= gy of the Ceylon kings from Mahasena to Mahirda V (A.D.275-1029).

# YEAR YI^\_I Ü2 1\_I\_22Ï2255\_125§I

3. Mario Bussagli - INDIAN EVENTS IN TROGUS POMPEITTSt SEARCH  FOR A LOST SOTIRCE - pp. 229-242. A detailed study on Indian Chronology from the "PROLOGI" to the 4A books of the" "HTSTORIARUIfl PHILIPPIC \\PIIM" with the "EPITOtlE" of - Junianus Justinus. Trogus referred in them to the epilogue of  the desplacement westwards of that groun of nomads referred to in Chinese sources as the Yueh-chih; from these came the d;\<mgsties of the Kusana ("Reges Thocarorum Asiani"). The expression "interitus que Saraucarim", could?t be reliably dated, would provide very im= portant data on a page of History (and a numismatic history) that is indeed veiled in mystery and that relates to the Saka dynasties in North-V/est India, the complex questions closely connected with the Indo-%iropean civilisation of the Tarlm's Basin, the fall of the Indo-Greek kingdoms of Bactriana and the history of a large part of those areas referred to in the Chinese sources as "the Coun= tries of the West". Tropus also speak on the origins of the dynasty and the empire of the Maurya, as seen in the person of the founder, Candraguota (called Sandrocottus) placing its final incoronation in 317 instead of 312 B.C. as commonly accepted (See: Tarn - THE GREEKS IN BACTRIA AND INDIA; pr»,46-47 et passim). And this would give us a new and different Jainas tradition.
# ANNOTATED STUDIES OP NUMISMATIC INTEREST PUBLISHED BY THE

# " E A S T

A N D W E S T " - QUARTERLY REVIEW OP THE ISTITUTO

# ITALIANO PER IL MEDIO E L'ESTREMO ORIENTS (IsMEO) - Director

Prof. Giuseppe Tucci - Direction: Via Merulana, 248 - 00185,ROMA.

4. Alherto Simonetta - AN ESSAY ON THE SO-CALLED "INDO-GREEK"  COINAGE - pp. 44-66. Detailed attempt of a general re-examination of the historical knowledges and numismatic evidences on the "Tndo-Greek" coinage "beginning with the INDO-PARTIAN COINAGE from the time of the alle= ged Bactrian coins of Mithridates 1° of Parthia to Gondoühares 11°, with 4 plates of coins and 6 tables of monograms, symbols, dynastic and genealglcal data, as follows: PI'^TE I, Prakrit and Pahlavi in= scrip...S-59.tions auoted among the text; List of Indo-Parthian Kings and anproximately contemnorary kings and kinglets of other dynasties (vassals,.joint kings, stratee-os and satraps); PLATE IT,with eight coins reproduced twjce the natural size (Bronze of Orodes I overstruck on a coin of Mithridates 11, from Susa: probpblv other same tyiDe.wom; bronze of Orodes I overstruck on Gotarzes I, from Susa; bronze drachm of Gondophares II with his name in Pahlavi; bronze of Sata= vastra (?),from Afghanistan; three bronzes of the new king "Dajapa= tira.ja", from Afghanistan); PT..A.TE III, with three coins reproduced twice the natural size (bronze of Pakores overstruck on "Soter ne= gas" and bronze tetradrachms of Sasan in which the word "Goridhra= miasa" is le^-ible); PLATE IV, with 28 Indo-Parthian coins from Sei= Stan. All the known types and varieties reproduced in actual size. (Coins No 1 to 1 "5 are in s^lvei^and attributed to Orthagnes, Gondo= phares I, Abdagases, Pakores(?), Sanabares I, Coins No 16 to 28 are in bronze and attributed to Sanabares II and Gondor)hares II); TABLE I, with a list of 314 monograms,and one symbol, used by the Greek suzerains; TABLE IT. with the coupling of monogram's numbers and the name of the rulers who used each of them on their coins; T'ABLES III.-IV.,known couples of monogram's numbers, which appear occasio= nally together on the coins and relative groupements. Joined: feo= graphical and dynastic analysis of the mint's monogram for:"BACTRA, TH^ KABÜI VALT,?Y, ARACHOSIA, TAXILA, BUCilPHALA; TABLE V., summary of the monograms used at least for some time by the various mints:

5. Franz Altheim and Ruth Stiehl - ALEXANDER THE GREAT AND THE  AVESTA - pp. 123-135. Geographical, historical and lexical study of the Greek influence on the Avestan language and literature with some numismatic referen= ces.

6. Alessio Bombaci - GHAZNI - pi). 247-259.  Geographical, his+orical and toponomical gurvey of the Afghan town from the Achaemenian conquest to the old Islamic times, with some numismatic references, a detailed bibliography and one simplified map of the region. Prof, Bombaci also states:"...Some sources OP a later age make mention in Arachosia of an ALEXANDROPOLIS, which would seem to have been the Capital (by Isidore of Charax) or of an ALEXANDRIA (Ptolemy; Stephanus), probably both the same city.
# 7) T. A. Trofimova - PALAEOANTHROPOLOGICAL REMAINS COMING FROM

THE TERRITORY OF ANCIENT XOREZM - pp. 283-302. Palaeoanthropological study of prehistoric and historic times human skulls with physionomic reconstructions and some compara= tions with the effigies of the Choresmian "kings" on the coins unhearted at Kastalski and Toprak-kala, "...most of whom have fa= ces of the Europoid type with prominent noses, and thick beard and moustaches, (Fig, 12/a,b,c: cojns of the "anonimous king", the "king" AFRIG and the "king" ARTAMOUKH). In another group of coins other anthropological feature can be noted. The face of the "kings" is low, the nose less nrominent. with a high base and the cartila= ginous part thick. These figures may be comnared to the representa= tives of the Indo-Pravidian groups, (""^ig. 13/a,b: coins of t^e "king" 3HASHIJFAR or CHAUCHAFAR and the "king" ABDAITAH)".

8. Alberto Simonetta - A NEW SS^AT ON THE IFDO-GR^.'^KS, TH'^ SAKAS  *k'NV* THE PArTT,\\VAS - M t h one map and one plate of coins - TDD'I ^4-1«3. •^moortant additional contributions to the previous essay (1^57) based on a short (and negative) analysis of the book: Allouche-Le Page, "L «ART MOFETAIRE DRS ROVAmTr;s BACTRTENS" and/^storical ard nnm-ismatic -^ata \<^omnarison ^rith the book of A.TC. Narain, THE TN= T)0-GREEKS, T-t in a very detailed pketch for a reconstruction of

the Tndo-Greek. Saka and "^ahlava history, basically from numistna^ tic sources, as a better tentative an'^ to some extent ar an alter= native to Nar^'in's and "flam's atterants. Tr^ Aupendix: I) Table of 3"^5 Greek raonor^rams foiind on Indo-Greek, Sake and -t'ahlava coins; IT) List of the kin.'^s using the mono^-^ams; III) List of the counlings of monop-rams known "from Tri'^o-^-reek and ^faka coins: TV) Grouns of monograms connected and belon.f^ing from the same mint; V) "Pilot monop^rams" tabl? for attribution to tv\>e mint of Bactra of some ba= sic Attic tvpe coins; '^''T) "''ilot monograms" table b°spd both on coins of Attic tvne and on bi\]inhaal coins by the same ruler: VTI) Wonop'rams belonp-ine: from the mint of Alexandria Arachosiae; VITT"^ S=\*rae, from thp mint of Al«='X'='ndronolip; TX) Same, from th'» nint of T'axila; * X)* Same, from the mint of Bucephala; XI) Table of monograms with unattributed location: XII) Tentative chronology and Rel'ition= shins of the "nynants, from Diodotus I C24'i-236 B.C.) to Gondophares IT (70-72 A.T).), Tjpon the coin's nlate:^Tmitation of drachm of Mi= thridates IT; 2) Countermarked drachm of Sinatruces. with c/mk. rea-= ding OTANNÏÏt; 3,4) Countermarked drachms of Phraates III, same c/mk, as No 2; 5) Countarmarked imitation as No 3 and 4 but different c/mk.; 6. Countermarked imitation of drachm of Orodes IT; 7 to 15) Co\\mtermarked drachms and imitations of drachms of Phraates IV; 16) "Drachm  of Tanlismaidates an^i Ragrndemp»; 17,18) Countermarked drachms of Tanlismaidates anri Rp^r^odeme,

# T^r\_SERIES\_-J^^T,.1\_0 - Nos\_1\_\_& 2\_ -\_^1ARCH-JUNE\_1\_9522

9. (Prof, K.C, 0;jha, university of Allahabad) - Book's Review:  - K, Narain - TH"^ JNDO-GR ^^KS -(Banaras, Hindu University, nubli=  shed by Oxford university Press, 1o57, p-i.XVI-201, with three mans and six nlates) ". r)-,^ 117\_1o.^ ^ The reviewer advances some relevant critical emendations both to the political and th\*» numismatic history concern of the Narain's book.
# ANNOTATED STUDIES OP NU1.IISMATIC INTEREST PUBLISHED BY THE

# " E A S T

A N D W E S T " - QUARTERLY REVIEW OP THE ISTITUTO

# ITALIANO PER IL MEDIO E L'SSTREMO ORIENTS (IsMEO) - Director

Prof. Giuseppe Tucci - Direction: Via Merulana, 248 - 00185,ROMA.

# NSW\_SERX^o - VOL. 10 - Ï!2\_4\_-\_DECEMBER\_29592

10. Franz Altheim and Ruth Stiehl - THE GREEX-ARAMAIG BILIN=  GUAL INSCRIPTION OF KANDAHAR AND ITS PHILOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE pp, 243-260. \* ^ Philological study of the Aramaic version of the Asoka's edict with short references to the inscriptions on coins of the?er= sian kinglet Fratadara (2nd Century B.C.) and the Soghdian coins with "kbst MLK»", in "Additions^'A (pp.254-25ü).

- • 11) (Prof. Giuseppe Tucci) - Book  Review; C.C.Das Gupta THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE KHAROSTHÏ SCRIPT ( Calcutta, Mukhopadhyay, 1958, pp.XVI+469) - at page 290. Short presentation of an important work that superseded any previous attempt and will prove of great use to the Indian numismatic scho= lars and collectors, "...Inscriptions and coins have been used, oi-sthouDJLthe chronology of these documents is not always absolutely certain, in the main a relative chronology can be established with some degree of accuracy. The modifications which the letters under= went are carefully studied. The treatment of the subject has been divided into various chapters each dedicated to a special group of documents; Asoka, Negama coins, Indo-Bactrian period. Tribal coins, Indo-Scythian period, Tndo-Parthians, Kadpishes I and II, the great Kusapa, and the later Kusanas, the Khotaneae Dharmapada Document No 661, Pepiye, Tajaka and Amgoka, Maheri, etc,"(G.Tucci), NEW SERIES -\_VOL, 11 - Nos 2\_& 3\_2«JUNE-SSPTSMBER\_1\_960j\_

12. (C-ustav Glaesser) - Book^^ Review: Franz Altheim - GESCHICHTB  PER HUNNEN - V0L,1P; VON DEN ANFANGEN BIS ZUM EINBRUCH IN EUROPA (From the origins to the invasion of Europe) - wi^;h contributions by Robert Gobi, Hans-Wilhelm Haussig, Ruth Stiehl, Erika Trautmann-Neh ring - (Berlin, Walter De Gruyter & Co,, 1959 - pp.VIII+463; 16 il= lustrations) - pp.191-196. A very enlarged "History of the Huns" created and organized as a kind of trilogy to substitute a work dedicated to the same subject which the Author published about ten years ago in German and French. "...Numerous numismatical data have been used by the Author and his collaborators"(G. Glaesser).

# NEW SERIES - V0L^2£ I\_ïÏ25\_2\_&\_3\_-\_JUNE-3BPTEMBER\_1\_9622

13. (Gustav Glaesser) - Book  Review: Franz Altheim - Gl'SCHICHTE DER HUNNEN - VOL.2°; DIE HEPHTHALITEN IN IRAN - in collaboration with Ruth Stiehl. Contributions by Zelik I, Jampolski, Eugen Lozovan, Feo= dora princess of Saxony-Meiningen, Erika Trautmann-Nehring - (Berlin, Walter De Gruyter & Co., I960 - pp.VIII+329; 7 illustrations) pp. 186-183.
This second volume is devoted entirely to the complex prohlems connected with the Hephthalites • presence in Iran, on the "basis of the theory set forth "by the Author in the first volume accor= ding to which the ethnic genesis of the Huns must have occurred, under the Hephthalites' leadership, in the north-eastern part of Iran. Particular importance is given to historical information provided hy Ethiopian sources whi oh until now have never "been consulted on the suhject (the Chromièie of Bishop lohannes of Nikiu, compiled towards the end of the Seventh Century hut preser ved only in the Ethiopian translation). With some numismatic, references.

# NEW SERIES\_-\_VOL^1\_2\_I\_ÏÏ2«l\_I\_?52™55-12§ll

14. Luciano Petech - THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS  OF NEPAL - pp. 227-232. The chronology of the Nepalese inscriptions earlier than the Newa= ri Samvat of 879-880 A.D. is a problem that has often exercised the ingenuity of scholars during the last seventy years. Mr. Petech gives us a summary of the proposed solutions and offers a simple solution, coming from a chronological list known both to the Indian and the Tibetan traditions (the astronomical work "Sumatitantra" and the Sa-Skya Pan-c'en chronological calculations). Accordiigto Mr. Petech, Manadeva and Guijakamadeva must have been the kings who issued the Mananka and GunaAka coins (as suggested already by San= kar and by Jayaswal) nlaced by D.W.Mac Dowall (See: THE COINAGE OP ANCIENT NEPAL, in "J.N.S.I.",ZXI(l960),pp.39-53) after those of Am^uvarman and Jisnugupta (Op.cit.,pp.42 and 45).

# NEW SERIES\_-\_VOL. 1\_3\_-\_No\_1\_\_-\_MARCH\_2962

15. Umberto Scerrato - ON A SILVER COIN OF TRAIANUS DECIÜS  FROM AFGH/.NISTAN - pp. 17-23. An "antoninianus", or double denarius, of the Roman emperor Traia= nus Decius (249-251 A.D.) found during a visit to the Bazaar of Ka= bul, with VDERITAS instead of VBSRITAS (variant to Cohen No 105. See: "Description Historique des Monnaies frappees sous 1'Empire Romain", Paris-London 1885 - Vol.V at page 196). Probably the first "antoninianus" found in Afghanistan of which one can give definite news and brought to the Bazaar by a farmer from the outskirt^^of Charikar, who found it in the area of the famous Begram-Kapislvtox^v^ placed on an important branch of the "silk route" which led from Bactra to Taxila. Short list of Roman and Byzantine coins found in Afghanistan and in Central Asia, from Charles Massonsfcime with two maps (showing the geographical distribution of RomanTin Afgha= nistan, Pakistan, India & Ceylon and the trade distribution of Ro= man coins in Afghanistan). Bibliographical Notes with various and detailed references to Roman and Byzantine coins also found in India, China and Indochina( and Kushana coins found in::i\}thiopia). With one statistical table of the hoards and single findings of Roman coins in Afghanistan & Pakistan from the 1st Century B.C. to the 5th Centu ry A.D, and two enlarged photographs (Obverse and Reverse) of the described "antoninianus".
# AIWOTATSD STUDIES OF NUMISMATIC INT3EEST PUBLISHED BY THE

# " E A S T

A N D W E S T " - QUARTERLY REVIEW CF THE ISTITUTO

# ITALIANO PER IL MEDIO E L'SSTREMO ORIENTS (IsMEO) - Director

Prof. Giuseppe Tucci - Direction: Via Merulana, 248 - 00185,ROMA.

16. S.N. Mukherjee - THE TRADITION 07 RAMA GUPTA AND THE INDIAN  NATIONALIST HISTORIANS - pp. 49-52. Since 1923 when a fragmentary drama called DEVICANDRAGUPTAM was discovered by Levy and Sarasvati, historians have debated about the historicity of Rama Gupta. The opinion of the Author is that the tradition whose story was the central theme of the drama should be treated as part of the Vikram tradition of the conquest of Ujjain by king Vikramaditya from the ^akas. Prof. Mukherjee states:"...The historicity of Rama Gupta is further attested by\_some copper coins found in the Malwa area, which bear the legend RAMA GUPTA in the normal Gupta script except for the rather archaic "tikar" after the letter "ga" (Of. "Journal of the Numismatic Society of India", Vol.XII, p.193). Even if some of the coins bear the legend Rama= gup"ta as Dr. Narain holds I do not find any reason to believe that there was another Gupta family contemporary to the imperial Guptas". So it is clear that the tradition of Rama Gupta cannot be rejected as mere folklore, or a fictional motif used by poets.

# NEW SERIES - VOL^ 13 - Nos\_2\_&\_3\_-\_JUNE-SEPTEMBER\_\_1\_962£

17. Robert Gobi - ZEGOMONOKO - pp. 207-212.  Sasanian drachms of the 5th and 6th centuries show often a coun= terraark struck three times on the rim of the coin, outside the die. This countermark has been read in the different ways by Ghirshman, Drouin, Specht, Junker, Hansen and Humbach. The new reading will be proposed on the basis of real palaeographic data and will be accompanied by a proper historical comment. The script is the continuation of the Greek-Bactrian script, which is deri= ved from the Greek and shows a development already on the Zusaria coins. Its provisional ending stage with a clear transition to cursive can be found on the so-called Kusano-Sasanian scyphate coins. The chronological setting is around 400 A.i. because about that ti= me the Kusano-Sasanian coins ceased to be struck (last king: Bahran IV, 388-359V Local variants of the alphabet without a doubt came into being, and of these a form-district is here represented. In any case, this chronological setting of c. 400 A.D. is the nearest to our countermarks from the point of view of development, and must serve as a starting point. A survey of the extent of the counter= marked Sasanian drachms of the rulers Balas, Kavad I and Xusro I (no overstrike on Hephthalite drachms or other contemporary coins is known) shows that the countermark, in all its slightly varying forma (nine different variants,^^as Pig.l), belong to one and the same period. Accordingly, Dr. Gobi read ZEGOMONOKO and * Ha* collea= gue Dr. Zurcher of the Sinological Institute of the University of Leyden has recognized the ruler SSE-KIN-MO-HAN-KHAN, an Eastern Turk'Qaghan quoted by the Chinese sources "Chou-shu" (c.629 A.D.) and "Pei-shil^"^(659,^A.D. ). Because the Easteri^Turks developed no

coinage/i;he"'countermarked drachms couUbe part of a Sasanian cash payment to the Turks, which the latter in their own fashion incorporated into the currency of the conquered territories by coun= termarking.