December 1986

# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY **OCCASIONAL PAPER No. 21**

**Report of the Islamic Numismatic Workshop at the** **Tenth International Numismatic Congress** **London,** **1986** Michael Bates

The meeting was called to order at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, 9 September, with Michael Bates in the chair. Michael

Broome, Secretary-General of the Oriental Numismatic Society, welcomed the participants on behalf of ONS, the
sponsor of the workshop, and the chairman called for reports on current Islamic numismatic activities, country by country.

**Turkey** ClJneyt Olger reported that the Turkish antiquities law which forbids the sale of coins more than 150 years old has restricted, but not completely extinguished, numismatic activity in Turkey. One dealer, Güvendik Fisekfio^lu, has begun to issue priced catalogues of Ottoman coins (1255 onward) under the name of * Para,* and there is a coin magazine, *Dundar,* showing the Increasing interest in collecting. In the museums, the Istanbul Arkeoloji Muzeleri has about 600,000 unclassified Islamic coins, but there is no curator for these since the departure of Ibrahim and Qevriye Artuk. The coins are not available for research without special permission. The two volume exhibition catalogue by the Artuks (1970-74) is out of print. Ölper will investigate how ONS might get permission to reprint it.

A * Catalogue of the Ottoman * *Coins in the Mint Museum* was published in 1985, listing the coins by ruler, mint, date, weight, and diameter, with 15 plates. There are more than 98 other museums in Turkey, many with coins, but they are invariably stored away and difficult to see. There are no curators specializing in Islamic coins, and no scholars in the universities working on numismatics. Tuncay Aykut is curator of the Yapi ve Kredi Bank collection but it has acquired no new coins for over thirty years. Their series "Nümismatik Yayinlari" (Numismatic Studies) ceased in 1982 with number 12. In September 1984, the Bank sponsored an International Seminar on the History of Islamic Numismatics and Coinage, to celebrate their 40th anniversary, at which thirteen papers were read.

The Turkish Numismatic Society, of which Mr. Olper is President, remains active and publishes a quarterly * * *Bulten. * Ölger continues his series on Ottoman numismatics. Numbers 11 (on the coins of Murad V and Abd al-Hamid II) and 12 (on the coins of Muhammad Rashad and Muhammad Wahid al-Din) are due out this year.

**Tunisia** Arlette Négre read a letter from Khaled Ben Romdhane, Curator of Coins at the Bardo Museum in Tunis, who has recently finished his thesis on the Almoravid currency and monetary history. It is unfortunately unpublished, but a copy can be consulted at the Paris Cabinet des Médailles. He has also published articles on the Murabit, Muwahhid, and Hafsid series in the Cabinet des Médailles, and has now begun a critical edition, with French translation, of a monetary treatise by the 17th century Moroccan, al-Jazna'i. There is no curator specializing in Islamic coins in Tunisia (Ben Romdhane is responsible for all coins in the Bardo, not just Islamic). The Central Bank's publication on Islamic numismatics, Messaoud Chabbi's * al-Nuqud al-Arabiyya * *fi Tunis (Les monnaies arabes en Tunisie)* (1968), is possibly available from the Director of External Relations, Central Bank of Tunisia. According to Négre, Hamed al-'Ajabi, of the Institut National d'Art et d'Archéologie, Tunis, began a study of Fatimid coinage in Tunisia, based on excavation finds at Sabra al-Mansuriyya, al-Qayrawan, and elsewhere. Its present status is not known. **Scandinavia**

Bengt Hoven reported on numismatics in Scandinavia. Oslo, Helsinki, and Copenhagen have acquired some new coins, but there are no Islamicists working on them. New coins in the Copenhagen cabinet since Ostrup's catalogue have been published by Anne Kromann in * Hikuin* no. 11 (1985). The Royal Coin Cabinet in Stockholm, where Hoven is curator for Islamic coins, receives many new hoards. The major publication activity is the * Corpus Nummorum * *Saeculorum * *IX-* *XI,* a project to catalogue all coins (including Islamic, pre-Islamic, Byzantine, and medieval European), found in hoards in Sweden. Seven volumes, each on hoards from a single geographical region of Sweden, have so far been published, with an eighth expected before Christmas.

Hoven is working on a special volume to include some 6,000 Islamic coins found on Swedish soil, listed by mint and year, with the mints in alphabetical order, ignoring dynasties and provincial divisions. This attracted considerable comment. Ilisch and Bacharach proposed a geographical order for the mints and Darley-Doran suggested Le Strange's provincial divisions. Hoven is also preparing a catalogue of a Spanish Islamic collection brought to Sweden by the diplomat G. D. Lorichs in the 19th century.
Gert Rispling of Stockholm is working on Samanid and pseudo-Samanid dirhams. His approach is to compile a comprehensive die study of the two series. All Samanid coins from a single mint seem to link up, not only in each year, but also from one year to the next. **Austria, Switzerland and Germany**

Lutz Ilisch reported that in Austria, the Islamic collection of the Historisches Museum is available for study, but there is no Islamic numismatic curator and no one in the country working on Islamic coins. In Switzerland, Ilisch is the only Islamic numismatist. He Is studying the letters of Heinrich Hottinger (1620-1667), a Swiss who taught at the University of Heidelberg, and the first European scholar to publish any study of Islamic coins. His correspondence from 1642 onward is preserved in Zurich. There are small collections of Islamic coins in the museums of Berne and Geneva.

In West Germany, there are no Islamic specialists in museums, except Jaeckel who looks after the Munich collection as a volunteer. There are several university projects in Islamic numismatics. Jacobi at Saarbrücken is working on a dissertation on Turkoman coins begun 15 years ago. Ilisch finished his thesis two years ago making use of the late Artuqid and Ilkhanid coinage of Mardin, 1260-1410. Monike Gronke, now an assistant professor at Freiburg University has studied Iranian medieval documents from Ardabil, useful for the terminology of coins. R. Puin at Saarbrücken is working on medieval Yemeni coinage. Lutz Richter-Bernberg has published studies of Buyid and Khwarizmzhah titulature, including an analysis of titles on their coins.

There are good Islamic numismatic libraries at Tubingen University, and at the Prussian State Library in Berlin. Stephan Heidemann, at the library of the Museum of Islamic Art in Berlin, is monitoring recent literature on Islamic history and working on excavation coins from Ctesiphon. Excavations under German auspices are in progress at Raqqa and al-Rusafa. Over 30 coppers with the mint "al-Madina Ma'dan Amir al-Mu'minin" were found there, suggesting a local connection. Many Islamic coin hoards come to notice first in Germany (and are dispersed there) because it is the first stop for dealers and smugglers from Turkey. Hoards also appear from Syria and the Yemen.

The German branch of the ONS meets regularly, but mostly discusses South Asian coins. Its meetings are of increasing scientific interest. Heinz Westphal's collection, which was to have gone to the Museum of Islamic Art in Berlin, was dispersed, but his photographs and card catalogue are now the property of the University of Washington, Seattle, under the care of Jere Bacharach, who will photocopy cards on request for research projects.

- S. S. R.  Nicholas Lowick reported on his recent visit to the USSR, when he visited Moscow, Leningrad, and Yerevan. In Moscow, Yelena Davidovich is working on a monograph on the Shaybanids, and also a book on hoards found in Uzbekistan similar to that on the hoards found in Tajikistan. In Leningrad, Marina Severova is studying the 15th century coins of the White Horde, and also compiling a bibliography of ail Soviet numismatic work, 1972-84. Shagurina is doing a study of Artuqid coins. In Yerevan, Mushegian is working on the Sasanian coinage of Armenia, and his daughter, who is also at the museum, is studying the 9th-10th century copper coins of Armenia.

Thomas Noonan briefly mentioned some other Soviet Islamic numismatists. Igor Dobrovol'skii, Curator of Medieval Islamic Coins at the Hermitage Museum in Leningrad, works on 9th and 10th century coins and helps in the publication of dirham hoards. Mrs. Svetlana Ianina. Curator of Islamic Coins at the Historical Museum in Moscow, now focuses primarily on Volga Bulgar and Golden Horde coinage. German Fedorov-Davydov of Moscow State University regularly publishes on Golden Horde coins as well as on Mongol influence on Rus' coinage. V. N. Riabtsevich of the Belorussian State University, Minsk, has some interest in the Islamic coins found in Belorussia.

Several scholars are active in the Caucasus. In Tbiisi, Irina Dzhalagania, at the Centre for Archeological Studies, has published several fundamental works on Sasanian and medieval Islamic coins from Georgia. T. la. Abramishvili and - V. Tsotseliia have published on Sasanian hoards from Georgia, including a catalogue of the Sasanian coins of Georgia  by the latter, and Ts. M. Gvaberidze has done some work on Ilkhanid coins of Georgia. Kh. A. Mushegian's 1983 study of monetary circulation in Armenia has several excellent chapters on Sasanian and medieval Islamic coinage from Armenia. M. A. Seifeddini continues to study the monetary history of Azerbaidzhan in the late Middle Ages.

As is to be expected, Soviet scholars have devoted much attention to the Islamic and related coinages of Central Asia, including Bella Vainberg's book on the pre-Islamic coinage of Khwarizm, Ol'ga Smirnov's catalogue of Sogdian bronze coins, and Tirkesh Khodzhaniiazov's catalogue of Seljuk coins. Besides Davidovich's numerous studies on Islamic coins, one should mention that T. S. Ernazarova, Institute of Archaeology, Tashkent, has a series of useful article? on the Islamic coins from the Afrasiab/Samarqand excavations. Many Islamic studies, especially on Ilek Khanid dirhams, have been published by M. N. Fedorov. B. D. Kochev has written on monetary circulation in Central Asia from the 11th to the 14th centuries. Finally, the study of Islamic coins appears to be growing among Tatar scholars in Kazan, where Azgar Mukhamadiev, for instance, has recently published a book on the Bulgar-Tatar coinage of the 12th-15th centuries.
In Britain, Lowick reported that Michael Broome is working on a study with Peter Woodhead on the silver shortage of Europe and the Middle East, on the weight standards of early Islamic silver coins (based on notes by Bates), on the imitation gigliati issued by the Aydin and Menteshe amirs, and on a corpus of the coinage of the Seljuks of Rum. Shamarri, from the School of Oriental and African Studies, is excavating near Baghdad and will catalogue the coins found there in his Ph. D. thesis. Colin Heywood of SOAS and Simon Bendall of Baldwin's are working on a paper on a mixed 15th century Ottoman/Byzantine hoard. Helen Brown has published Islamic coins found in Malta, and is also preparing a catalogue of Islamic coins found in excavations in England. A. S. ("Sandy") Morton has just published a catalogue of the Egyptian glass weights in the British Museum, and is now studying the Iranian province of Ruyan, with special reference to the Ustundar dynasty. Susan Tyler-Smith is preparing for publication her talk on the late Yazdagird **III** coinage, some of which she attributed to the Arabs.

Lowick's own main activity is the completion of his catalogue of the 'Abbasid coinage, 132-218 H. The coins will be arranged by provinces. The catalogue may be published by the Middle East Center of the University of Washington. The RNS publication * Coin Hoards* is now on an occasional basis, not annual. Volume VIII will appear next. Lowick has much hoard material on file and available to others for reference. The British Museum plans a small exhibition of Sasanian and Kushano-Sasanian coins. Michael Broome added that ONS are proposing a biennial award in honour of the late Paul Balog, for the best published paper on an Islamic numismatic subject. **France**

Arlette Négre reported that in France, Fayez Adas and Eric Ollivier have just completed their catalogue of 1,200 Umayyad and 'Abbasid glass weights kept in the Bibliotheque Universitaire in Strasbourg. Claude Cahen in France is in his 80's, but still at work on studies of Islamic monetary history. Raoul Curiel, retired, now has time to work on publication of his past research on Arab-Sasanian and Arab-Byzantine coinage, especially copper. Daniel Eustache has just completed the corpus of Alawite coins published by the Bank of Morocco.

Ryka Gyselen, Chargée de Recherche at the CNRS, is working on Arab-Sasanian coins, and, with Curiel, on a find of Arab-Byzantine coppers from Irbid. Gilles Hennequin, also a Chargé de Recherche of the CNRS, is beginning work on volume IV of the Paris catalogue, having just published volume V. He is also cataloguing other Islamic collections in France, including that of Marseilles, recently published, and the collection of the Paris Mint. Ludvig Kalus, another Chargé of the CNRS, an ex-student of Dominique Sourdel, is working on a compilation of all Islamic coin hoards up to the fall of Baghdad to the Mongols, a ten-year project. Youssef Ragheb, Chargé of the CNRS, is publishing articles on Egypt's medieval monetary systems, based on papyri and texts from Cairo.

Négre herself has published a hoard of 49 late Murabit gold coins, the first to be found in France. She also keeps up with excavation coins from Syria and the Gulf area and with long-time projects on religious formulae and onomastics. She is approaching retirement at the Bibliotheque Nationale and will probably not be replaced. At the BN, new security measures make imperative a previous application for an appointment and the presence of an oriental specialist.

Spain **and Portugal** Saenz-Diez reported that Islamic numismatics is a very active field in Spain. Spanish Islamic coins are regarded as part of the country's national heritage, not as something foreign. There are about 12 Islamic numismatists publishing in Spain and Portugal. Lorente and Ibrahim have recently published * Laminas ineditas de D. Antonio * *Delgado* and are working on the Islamic coins of Ceuta. Saenz-Diez is continuing his study of the mint of Fas. Canto and Pellicer are working on the coinage of the Umayyad 'Abd al-Rahman III. Navascues' thesis on the Muluk al-Tawa'if may be published. An Islamic Iberian Congress was held on 21-23 March 1986 in Saragossa with papers by Balaguer, Canto, Navascues, Kassis, Salvador Fontenia, and Pellicer. There was a general discussion on coordinating future work in the field.

- S. A. **and Canada** William Spengler reported that in the United States the ANS has begun a photofile, available to visitors, of all Islamic and South Asian coins illustrated in dealers' auction and fixed price lists. The scope is current and future issues and retrospectively as far as possible. All Stephen Album's lists have already been processed. The illustrations are mounted on 3 x 5 cards with basic identifications and filed by dynasty. The ANS also has a file of all Islamic mints with their detailed dates of operation but this is not up to date.

The entire 50,000 Islamic coins in the collection of the ANS have been computerized. A list for any dynasty, province, mint, etc. can be obtained on request to the appropriate curator. Work has now begun on the South Asian coins, with some 13,000 entered. Bates' main current projects are his catalogues of the excavation coins from Fustat and of the collection of the Museum of Islamic Art of the Kuwait National Museum, and a general volume * Islamic Coins * to be published by Methuen. At the Smithsonian, Hebert maintains his indexed bibliographic file. He has published his study of the coins of the Salghurid Abish in * Hamdard Islamicus,* a Pakistani journal. The collection of the Smithsonian has been provisionally computerized.
Album has put aside his studies of the Ilkhanids and Timurids and is working on 5 hoards. Noonan, at the University of Minnesota, continues his work on the dirham hoards of western Eurasia up to 1100 A.D. He has published a series of articles on the routes of the dirham flows from the Middle East into Russia and is now looking at the hoard evidence for the changes in output of Islamic mints with time. Bacharach continues his studies of the coins of the Ilkhanids and their era. Sheila Blair has published two articles on Ilkhanid coinage and is investigating epigraphical style on 10th century Iranian coins. DeShazo is trying to establish the chronology of regnal dates on Mughal coins. Frye works on pre-Islamic Iranian coinages.

Judith Kolbas has completed her corpus of Mamluk glass weights and is finalising her thesis on the coinage reform of Ghazan Khan. Lindner, of the University of Michigan, is studying the coinage of the Seljuks of Rum, the Kutaiha hoard, and the early Ottoman coinage. Nicol is making good progress with his corpus of Fatimid coinage. Slocum is preparing a catalogue of the coinage of the Danishmendids. Spengler has virtually completed his corpus of Ghurid coins. Warden continues to work on the Arab-Sasanian coinage of Kirman and Jayy as a basis for an Arab-Sasanian corpus. Whitaker is working on a study of Umayyad dirham mints. Wood of the University of Chicago is studying the coinage of Timur's early years. Kassis, of the University of British Columbia, works on the coinage of Spain and North Africa, with special reference to the evidence of the coins for religious ideology.

This report is based on Bates' notes. He is grateful to Jere Bacharach, Michael Broome, Elizabeth Darley-Doran, Bengt Hoven, Kenneth MacKenzie, Arlette Negre, Thomas Noonan, Gert Rispling, and Juan Saenz-Diez for corrections and additions. *f%^* - • «5 17,T.  ^r «ni.\*twif' -Hfci.^i\*.^.w".\**^* ««jiMMi'i **t -•** **. • '**

**Galataprint, Park House, Albert Road, Wolverhampton, WV6 0AG, England.**