## O N S *OcUUUi^cn^aJ* *?Cüben* * Af *

#. A TENTATIVE HYDERABAD DATE LIST

by Richard K. Bright Some time ago, Holland Wallace and I interested ourselves in a date and regnal year listing for Hyderabad coins, particularly the machine struck ones of Mir Mahbub and Mir Osman. Holland made up the original list and since then, I have added such certain dates that I learn of.

On the machine struck coins of Hyderabad, the AH dates are on the obverse and though the digits are small, probably moat collectors are aware of them. On all coins except the one annas, Y-28, 29, and I4.2, regnal years are on the reverse. The small digits are hidden away in the extensive margin legends so that they have been vmnoticeable to most. On the gold, they are slightly below the 9:00 position halfway between the inside and the outside edges of the margin legend. On silver and copper coins, they are at the 6:30 position directly adjacent to and below the inner circle. The AH 1305 rupee and the cpppers of IH 1 312 and I3I6 were in circulation a very short time before being recalled. Tarapore believed that the AH 13I2 copper may have been fraudently silver plated to pass as fractional rupees even though their denominations are stated on the coins. The AH 1316 coppers are slightly smaller but apparently also thought to be xinsafe. The Ah 1 307 rupee was probitWy a pattern that saw some circulation. A new gold type, namely the partial 'ain of Mir Osman of AH

1330 was learned of for the first time. The date range of three of the four recorded gold types of this iruler has been extended. The half mohur of AH 13214- is so far known only in silver and is probably a pattern or presentation piece. There has been a singular lack of agreement in the writings on the first machine struck coins. Tarapore descsities the AH 1305 rupee as the first and Kaus agrees but thinks it strange that H. G. H. Armstead in "The Story of Hyderabad Coinage" in The Indian States Forces Annual for 1914-3 and Faramji K. Viccaji in "Notes on the Handminting of the Coins of India" state that the first machine struck Hyderabad coins were minted in AH I3I2. The former was an exmintmaster and the latter an ex-assistant mintm«ister at Hyderabad. Mr. Kaus has a copper proof of the AH 1305 rupee. Then in the July, 1970 issue of The Numismatist, P. B. Cheney, another former mintmaster says that the first coins to be machine struck were the issues of AH I3I2. It seems strange that so many former mint officials wouldn't have the correct facts yet the evidence of the coins says differently.

In the following list, a dot instead of a number indicates that the AH date is known but not the regnal year.

REFERENCES: Chenoy, P. B.; "Rare Coins of Hyderabad State"; The Numismatist, July, 1970, pp. 9U.5-965. Kaus, Hurmuz; "Machine-Made Coins of Hyderabad"; J.N.S.I., vol. IX, Part II (1914-7), pp. I26-I3O, Tarapore, P. S.; "Some Bahmani, Mughal and Asafjahi Coins"; J.N.S.I., vol. Ï, Part I (I9I4.3), pp. 79-814.. *Se^/J.* * I(f^5 * --- AH Actual Date R. Y ' s.

| 1327 i | 1-l | 2 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| I3i | li. 15-16 |  | Mo. **• ** **' ** i^l 1i\| **• **

# G O L D ***h *** ***h *** Mo. Mo. **^ ** **-\* ** lA 14-0 (Ag) ill 1\|1 1+1

## hk **. ** **• ** *f * *J * 1/8 Mo. **-** **,** *** ^-^. *** 1+1 **^ ** Ru. ***• *** **^ ** 37,38 38,39 ***ko *** 1+1 1+3 10+ 1,2 6,7 11+ 31,32 31+

# I L V ***h *** Ru, 1+3 ***Uk *** 31+

# E R ***k *** Ru. 35,39 **, **

| 13,11+ | 11+ |
|:--- |:--- |
| 35,36 | 36,37 |
| 1/8 | Ru. | 35,36 36,37 1/8 Ru. 31+, 39 ***' ***

## l\> **\* ** **• ** 22,23? 32,33 **• ** **• • **

# C(

# ^ - Mir 1+0 i+0 **» ** **ff **

## hh Mir

# )PPER I ***k *** - Mahbul Osman Half ' a i n t^ill ' a i n **3 ** **, ** ***k *** A w. An.

# X 1 An. Anna X round X

# X

# X

# X

# X X X X,0 **o,x ** X

# X X X

# X **• ** **-, ** **-. ** 1 An.

# fc COP.-NIC. Pal Pai > **^? ** 38,39,1+0 39.1+0,14-1 1+0,1+1 1+2 ***k2 ***

## kk

## 1.2 r •

***k.i*** ** ** **, ** ***r *** ***^\*l *** 7,8 8,9 13,11+ 11+ 18,19 **• ** •.23 r n d. & s o.

# T - 1 Anna copper. n i c k e l & copper

31+