Jan.1983

# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

# OCCASIONAL PAPER NO.17

# THE GADEN TANGKA OF TIBET

# N.G.RHODES

The Gaden Tangkas are among the most common of all Tibetan coins, but
they are also the least understood. I have now developed a classific-
ation for them, which is based on the ornamentation in the outer angles
between the petals on both sides of the coin, and is supplemented by a
major change in the order of the eight lucky signs and changes in style
and weight standard. A description of the mints involved and some of
the arguments for attributing particular classes of coins to each is
given in Information Sheet No. 19, "Tibetan Mints" (Rhodes, 1978).

A close study of all the variations in detail of design has enabled a
sequence to be identified. Within this sequence the coins fall
naturally into 8 different classes. The first two classes are dis-
tinguished by major differences in weight or style, but thereafter
occasional changes made in the outer ornamentation provide the basis
for classification. Within each class the details of the lucky signs
change in a systematic manner and have been noted as varieties.

Details of all the significant varieties are set out in Appendix I,
but the main differences between the classes may be summarised as follows:- Class Obverse Reverse Weight

# A

# B

# C

# D

# E

# F Outer angles - • •••

# V - •  « \*\*\*\* - Waterline below lotus None 2 lines 1 line 1 line 1 line 1 line Outer angles <*^

# \\ A M **WWb»** - •  - • • •  -

# V Centre circle Pellet 3 Crescents 2 Crescents 2 Crescents 2 Crescents 2 Crescents c 5.1 c 4.5 c 4.5 c 4.7 c 4.7 c 4.7 grm grm grm grm grm grm reducing to c 4.2 grm --- Class Outer angles G None

# H Obverse Waterline below lotus 1 line 1 line Reverse Weight Outer Centre angles circle None 2 Crescents c 4.2 grm - • 3 Crescents c 4.1 grm

Class A stands out, because of both its style and weight. It is the
only class to have an average weight of more than 5 gms, and there is
no water-line below the lotus flower. Numerous minor differences may
be observed between specimens, but I have only divided the issue into
two groups, on the basis of style. A(i) consists of fine style pieces,
while A(ii) pieces are cruder and less uniform in style. The most
distinctive feature is that the three lotus stems are separate in A

(i) and joined in A(ii). It would be natural to assume that the fine
style pieces precede the cruder style, but as there is no discernable
difference between them in weight standard and the coins are relatively
scarce, I believe that they were all struck over a relatively short period of time.

This class was the only one published by de Lacouperie (1881), who dated
the coins to 1772 because he totally misunderstood the inscription.

Walsh (1907) subsequently corrected the reading of the inscription, but
retained the attribution to the 18th century. I would, however, regard
a date as early as this unacceptable for many reasons, but particularly
because of the provenance of the coins in the British Museum.

The British Museum received three gifts which included Tibetan coins
between 1847 and 1853, totalling 8 Sino-Tibetan coins and 4 Kong-par

Tangkas. During the 1860s three further gifts were received, consisting
of 3 Sino-Tibetan, 2 Kong-par and 3 Gaden Tangkas. This evidence
provides a firm terminus ante quem of 1865 for Gaden Tangka A(i), but
it is also significant that none of the early gifts, and particularly
that of James Prinsep, contained any coins of this type. The Prinsep
gift was very representative, and there is little doubt that he would
have acquired a Gaden Tangka if one had been available when he was
collecting coins in India. This suggests a terminus post quem of about 1835.
The known dates on Tibetan coinage, show that the Chinese continued to
strike coins in Tibet, albeit sporadically, until 1836. It is therefore
unlikely that the Tibetan Government would have introduced a new coin
type while the Chinese were still powerful enough to issue their own
coins. After 1836, however, the influence of the Chinese declined, and
there was no reason why the Tibetans could not then have struck their
own coins with a purely Tibetan design. Unfortunately there is little
further evidence to narrow down the period of issue. It is only the
wear on the British Museum specimens which suggests that the coins
were struck early in the period rather than later, probably in the 1840s.

Class B is easily distinguishable because of the smaller flan, the
reduced weight standard and two lines, representing water, below the
lotus flower. B(i) has lucky emblems identical to those on Class A,
but in later varieties the SW symbol changes significantly. B(i)
and B(ii) have a plain arch in the NNW angle on the inscription side
instead of the three little crescents, and they also have a dot to
the left and a dash to the right of the central lotus flower. B(iii)
has an additional pellet by the conch shell, and the dot and dash

(now more like a hook) appear on the inscription side. This variety
has another secret mark, whereby the top petal on the inscription
side is joined to the central octagon by **a** faint line. B(iv) makes
some minor changes in the lucky signs and seems to drop all use of
other secret marks. B(iiia), B(iva) and B(ivb) are clearly errors.

Pieces omitting the secret marks are sometimes found, but these are
usually, if not always, contemporary forgeries of light weight and poor alloy.

These secret marks indicate a sophisticated control of the details
of the design, and it is probable that they were introduced partly
as a method of detecting forgeries and partly to identify the date of issue and the official responsible.

This class is extremely common and represents nearly one in four of
all Gaden Tangkas. This was the first time **that** coins had been struck
on such a large scale in Tibet. The issue must have caused a significant
increase in the number of coins in circulation. It would not have
been possible to strike so many coins without a major influx of silver
into Tibet. These factors both help to indicate a likely start date
for the issue of this class. In September 1879, the explorer Kishen Singh
mentioned that there were two types of Tibetan silver coin in circu-
lation, the "chanja paulung" (clearly the Sino-Tibetan coins) struck
in fine silver, and the other coins "distinguished by the names of the
rulers who issued them" (presumably referring to the old Nepalese coins)
with alloy (Rawat, 1973). Both were equal in value at 6 annas, and
it is probably significant that this traveller makes no mention of

Gaden tangkas. (If, as suggested above. Class A coins had only been
struck in small numbers thirty years earlier, then it is not surprising
that Singh makes no reference to them.) By December 1881, Sarat

Chandra Das (1892) was able to say that "there were four varieties of
tankas then current in Tibet, two of Nepalese minting, two made at

Lhasa, the best being that known as Gaden Tanka", and he also said
that 3 tangkas were equivalent to 1 rupee, so the tangka was valued
at 5/3 annas. Hence, between 1879 and 1881 the Gaden Tangka had
become well-known, and the value of the tangka in relation to the
rupee had fallen by over 10% which strongly suggests that Class B
was introduced about 1880. Furthermore it was in 1879 that the

British opened up the road to the Jelep La, between Sikkim and Tibet,
and in 1881 the Darjeeling Hill Railway was finished. The opening
of these routes helped to encourage trade between Bengal and Tibet,
and as this trade was nearly always unbalanced, numerous silver
rupees found their way to Tibet and would have ensured a steady
supply of silver to the Tibetan mint from then on.

The mint used at this time was almost certainly Dod-pal, the Government
metal factory described as a mint by Jaeschke (1881) in his Tibetan-

English dictionary. Class B probably continued until about 1894.

A date well after 1891 is indicated by the fact that the Kong-par

Tangkas dated 15-24/5 (1890/1 AD) have lucky signs similar to B(iii),
so B(iv) was probably struck after 1891. Also a drawing of a specimen
of B(iv) was sent to Spinks in 1894 (Spink 1895).
When writing "Tibetan Mints" (Rhodes 1978) I had assumed that as the

Tip arsenal opened in 1895, and as Waddell (1906) had mentioned the
mint in the same sentence as the Tip arsenal, it was reasonable to
assume that a mint was located at Tip. Since then, however, I have
located a further eye witness account of the Tibetan mint written by
the Buriat Mongol G, C. Tsybikoff (1918), who visited Lhasa in 1900/1.

As this account is of particular interest, I reproduce it in full:-

"...the coins... are now locally struck by hand in the mint in the

Potala, under the supervision of the Lama Treasurer. I was fortunate
to actually see the striking. It was done by a hand forging process
from a copper-silver alloy. First thin bars were forged on long,
narrow, stone anvils, the discs were cut from them with shears which
were then struck in a vice with an engraved die. During my time in

Lhasa a foreigner, who looked as if he came from India, had set up a
machine to strike coins in the mint, but I was unable to see with my
own eyes the coins struck with this new process." (My thanks to

Dr K. Gabrisch for providing a translation of this work). From this
account it seems clear that the mint was situated in or near the

Potala. As Dod-pal was located just at the foot of the Potala it
must be the mint described by Tsybikoff. There seems no reason to
think that coins were struck at Tip at this, or at any other time.

In Class C, the whole style changes. The lotus flower now has only
one water-line and in the centre on the inscription side there are
now only two crescents, instead of the three which appear on Class B.

This style continues unchanged into Class D, where, for the first time,
the symbols in the outer angles of the petals were changed, so that

3 dots replaced the three crescents on the inscription side. The order
of the varieties is clearly determined by the progressive changes in
the lucky signs at the N, NW and W points. During Class D the weight
standard seems to have been increased from about 4.5 gms to about

4.8 gms. This may have led to the change in design, although, the
reason for the increase in weight standard is now unknown. A specimen
of D(iv) was illustrated by W. Carey (1902) and as he visited the

Chumbi Valley in July 1899, it is probable that this variety was struck
in or just before 1899. D(v) has identical symbols to D(iv) and was
probably struck in the same **year,** although a much more sophisticated
coin press must have been used presumably the machine seen by Tsybikoff
in 1900/1. A specimen in mint condition was obtained by Walsh in 1902.

The rarity of this variety suggests that only a few pieces were struck
before the machine attracted official disapproval and the use of it
was abandoned in favour of the traditional method. Varieties D(iv)
and D(v) have a slightly different central lotus flower, which continued to be used in Class E.

Class E is distinguished by the appearance of three crescents in the
outer angles between the lucky signs. Otherwise the style continues
unchanged, and a steady progression of changes in the lucky signs at

NE, E, SE and NW show the order of the subvarieties. The only un-
certainty is the relative position in the sequence of E(iv) and E(vi).

The average weight fluctuates slightly during this class, but the
main change in the metrology is a significant increase in the standard
deviation of the actual weights of specimens around the mean. This
indicates a change in the way the mint controlled the weight standard.

In addition, the artistic quality of the dies deteriorated, particularly in E(iv).

Among the varieties of Class E, E(v) stands out. The style is totally
different from the other varieties, in that the whole die is much
smaller and it lacks the two dots to right and left of the central
lotus flower. Otherwise details of the lucky signs are similar to E(iv),
so it seems likely that the two varieties were struck in the same year.

However the styles are so different that it is tempting to think that
the two varieties were struck in different mints. This may indeed have
been the case, as the new mint at Dode was nearly ready in 1904, when
it was visited by Ottley (1906), although it was only opened for full
production around 1907. It is not impossible that a small trial issue
of coins could have been struck there either just before the British
arrived in Lhasa in August 1904, or sometime in the following year,
but this is only conjecture, as the employment of a new die cutter
at Dod-pal could equally well explain the differences between E(iv) **and** E(v).

Class E was followed by Class F, which is distinguished by a single
pellet in the angles between the lucky signs. The average weight and
Standard deviation is initially similar to Class E, and the reason for
the change in design was probably the transfer of the mint from Dod-pal
to Dode in about 1907. Dode was a purpose built mint, where a water-
wheel was built to help power the coin presses. The sequence of
varieties is not quite so clear as for the earlier classes, but a
progression can be observed in some symbols such as those at NE, NW,

W and SW, and the altered die F(iiib) proves that F(ii) preceded F(iii).

F(iia) and F(iiia) are mules, although I have not yet been able to
examine these rare errors carefully enough to find die-links with
adjacent types. The die-link between F(iv) and F(v) is the only die-
link I have observed between varieties for the whole series. In

Appendix I, I have distinguished between F(vi) and F(vii) by the
diameter of the central circle, although my analysis of weights has
thrown into doubt the validity of this distinction. It is possible
that some pieces of this design were struck to the higher weight
standard used up to variety F(v), but this is not certain, and no
satisfactory way of distinguishing the heavier coins on the basis of design alone has been found.

Variety F(iii) can be dated with some degree of certainty. The
details of the lucky signs are identical to those on the special fine
silver tangka, Yeoman (1974) No.14, which was struck specially for
distribution to monks by the Dalai Lama on 21st February 1910. About

600,000 of these special tangkas must have been struck towards the
end of the Tibetan year 15-43 (1909/10); F(iii) must therefore have
been the type of Gaden Tangka being produced at that time.

A consideration of how many varieties there are between F(iii), prob-
ably struck in 1909, and Class C, probably struck around 1895 indicates

14 main types for about 15 years. This can hardly be coincidence,
and it is very tempting to suggest that during this period it was the
rule to change some detail of the design every year. The issue of

D(iv) in 1899 fits in with this theory. The missing type can be
explained if we regard E(iv), which is easily the commonest variety
in this period, as spanning the two years 1904/5. It is equally
possible that the closure of the mint during the presence of the

British in Lhasa could have disrupted normal mint procedure, so that
no change in design was made when production was resumed. If we now
extend this theory to the period after 1909, variety F(iv) should have
been struck in the Tibetan year 15-44, but before the mint was closed by
the Chinese in April 1910, that is in a period of less than two months,
which would explain its relative rarity. Moreover F(v) was probably not
struck until early in 1912, when the Chinese authority in Lhasa collapsed,
and the rarity of this variety could be explained if the mint opened a
few days before the end of the Tibetan year 15-45.

In any case the principle of a change in variety each year seems to have
been abandoned with F(vi). This variety, together with F(vii), is one
of the commonest of all, and its issue must have extended over several
years, perhaps from 1912 to 1915. The reason for abandoning the change
in design each year can only be guessed. It may have been that the
authorities kept the same design so as not to draw attention to the
reduction in weight standard which took place during the issue of this
class. Perhaps there was a change in the method of supervision of the
mint, so that the mint official responsible for the quality of coinage,
who was apparently changed each year prior to 1912, was now replaced less frequently.

At this time a 2 tangka piece was struck, with identical lucky signs to
those on F(vi) and F(vii). The weight standard is difficult to determine,
but appears to be around 9.2 gms, so it seems likely that it was struck
early in the period rather than late. It is also unlikely that a double
tangka would have been struck at the same time as the fine silver 5

Sho pieces, first struck in 1913, which were the same size. 1912 is
therefore the most likely date for the issue of the double tangka.

The varieties after F(vii) are the most difficult to arrange on the
grounds of a gradual evolution of style and details of design. F(viii)
follows smoothly from F(vii), but several changes are made at once for

F(ix). Furthermore, a very wide range of styles may be found with very
little change in the lucky signs. In my classification I have distin-
guished between the fine style pieces, F(viii) and F(ix), and the pieces
of less fine style, but with little other change in design, which are
designated F(x) and F(xi). Since such changes in style seem to occur in
parallel, it seems likely that these varieties were issued concurrently
at two different mints. This in fact appears to have been the case, as
the Dode mint was organised into two sections. Upper Dode and Lower Dode,
each in the charge of a different monk official. Since the two sections
of the mint were in the charge of different officials, it is likely that
their products would have been distinguished by such variations. Indeed
an example of this is cited by Kempf (1969), who suggested that the
pellet over the denomination on the 5 sKarma pieces of 15-55 and 15-56

(1921/2) distinguished the issues of Upper Dode. Using this pellet as
an indicator, it is probable that varieties F(viii) and F(x) were struck
in Upper Dode, as they have a pellet by the lotus flower, while F(ix)
and F(xi) which have no pellet were probably struck in Lower Dode.

The fine style pieces, F(viii) and F(ix) are certainly the earliest in
the series, as their style continues smoothly from F(vii). F(ix) is
rather scarcer than F(viii), so it is probable that Lower Dode started
issuing tangkas only part way through the period of issue of F(viii).

It may be significant that silver 5 Sho coins stopped being struck in

Dode in 15-50, which would have freed some presses, perhaps in Lower Dode, for the striking of tangkas in 1917.

In 1918, when Ser-Khang, the gold mint, opened near the Norbhu Lingka

(the Dalai Lama's summer palace to the south-west of Lhasa) it is
possible that the die-engraver from Dode was transferred to the new mint
to work on the dies for the new gold coins. This would have left Dode
without a talented engraver, and the effect is clearly visible on the
dated coins. Hence the cruder style pieces, F(x) and F(xi) would have
been struck from 1918 onwards. Numerous minor differences are to be
found in these varieties, but although I have mentioned some of the more
obvious ones in my listing it is doubtful if any of them are truly
significant. Certainly the dies were produced by several different
die-cutters, as there are several identifiable styles, distinguished
by such features as small or large dots in the border, but I have not thought it worthwhile to do a full analysis.

The issue of tangkas at Dode seems to have continued unabated until

1922, when it suddenly ceased due to an increase in price of silver on
world markets, and the consequent hoarding of even the debased silver
tangka in Tibet. At the same time the issue of the rupee was suspended
in India, although its minor denominations were still struck in silver
there. During the year ending March 1925, however, India supplied Tibet
with Rs.1,117,600 of silver, and it seems likely that a proportion of
this silver was used to strike Gaden Tangkas of variety F(xii). This
variety fits happily into this **period,** as it is of crude style and is
similar to the later issues of F(x) and F(xi), but has a number of
changes in the details of the design. Although most specimens of F(xii)
are a normal 27 mm in diameter, one remarkable piece is 31 mm in diameter.

During this period the Gaden Tangka was known colloquially as Tangka Ghabo
ie. white tangka. because of the blanching process to which the coins were
subjected before striking in order to hide the poor quality of the silver.

There is only one issue which I have not discussed in chronological
order, that is Class G. It is of fine style, but the design differs in
many details from the main series. The most significant feature is the
style of writing the word "rnam", which is identical to the style used
on the gold coins. This may have been the mint designator of the gold
mint, as Sir Charles Bell indicates in his diary that silver tangkas
were being struck at the gold mint, when he visited it in October 1921.

Similar calligraphy is also found on a series of 1 Sho coins which was
probably struck at the gold mint after it ceased striking precious
metal coins late in 1921 or early in 1922. Class G was, therefore,
almost certainly struck in the gold mint around 1921, with its dies
engraved by the same artisan who had cut the dies at Dode until 1918.

The only other Gaden Tangka to have the distinctive calligraphy is F(xe),
a particularly crude variety, which may be a contemporary forgery, or
else the product of an inexperienced die-engraver who made an inadvertent error.

There remains only the Class H Gaden Tangka to be discussed. This is
remarkable, because it was machine struck with a collar. According to
a report by Weir dated 6th **February 1929,** the Tibetans were preparing
to issue silver tangkas to "be turned out at the rate of 3000 tangkas
an hour by machinery worked by electricity". A subsequent report
dated 7th December 1929 indicates that tangkas were being struck in Lhasa
at that time, and it is therefore clear that these **must have** been of

Class H. The dot in the outer angles and the calligraphy are of the
normal Dode pattern, and it is possible that the two varieties of conch-
shell indicate that the issue was spread over two years, although the
rarity of this class seems to **imply** that **production** cannot have lasted
more than a few days if they really were struck at the rate of 3000 a day.
That completes the study of the Gaden Tangka. Only once after 1929 or

1930 was the old design used, when fine silver presentation pieces

*were* struck in enormous quantities for the Dalai Lama to present
to monks in the late 1940s. These pieces are easily recognisable as

Yeoman (1974) No.31, and should not really be regarded as part of the normal run of tangkas.

After 1930 the Tangkas continued to circulate to a significant extent.

Although their value was updated in line with their intrinsic value,
this stabilised at around 8 to the rupee until 1942, when their value
rose to about 4 to the rupee. Surprisingly, at no time was any
selective melting of the heavier, earlier or finer silver pieces under-
taken, and surviving specimens seem to be a fairly random sample of those pieces that were struck. The Gaden Tangka Appendix I Description of main classes and varieties All classes have the following types:

Obv: stylised Lotus design within circle surrounded by the eight Buddhist lucky symbols in radiating petals.

Rev: eight petalled flower within star surrounded by inscription broken up into eight oval frames. Inscription in Tibetan reading "Ga-den Pho-dang chhog-le rnam-gyal" = The Gaden Palace victorious on all sides. Class A Circa 1840s. Dod-pal Mint.

No water-line below lotus flower. Pellet in centre of rev.

(i) Fine style. Lotus flower has 3 separate stems, (ii) Cruder style. Stems of lotus flower joined.

Numerous minor varieties in lucky signs, especially in conch shell (W). Fishes (NE) always *•'fy* in (i), but "Jj». or \\/^ in (ii). Class B Circa 1880-1894. Dod-pal Mint.

Double water-line below lotus flower. Three crescents in centre of reverse.

^ ( i ) S'(^«SW rfjw ^ Nw4rPlain a r c h t o 1. of\<«i;,on r e v. ^ ( i i ) S SW rti W NW4rPlain arch t o 1. of'C'lVon r e v. ^ ( i i i ) S SWrfiW^'NW»^. t o l. o f S, ' r » o r - » » t o 1. of jf». --- Class B (cont)

( i i i a ) S SW W NW. t o r. of **jflf,'x-or'»\>»** **t o r. of 3f«.** **^(iv)** ** ** **S-p- SW** ** ** **W** **^** **NW** **t\<\|\|fNo s e c r e t marks,** **(iva)** ** ** **S** **SW** ** ** **W** **^NW** **(ivb)** ** ** **S** ** ** SW>y/ W ^ NW

Types (i) and (ii) have dot to 1. and crescent to r. of lotus. Fishes always 1 ^ (NE) on (i), but •^^ or •'ïi»' on other types. On (iii), small line joins petal containing 3f«l\\ to concave octagon on rev. Class C Circa 1895-6. Dod-pal Mint?

Single water-line below lotus flower. Two crescents in centre of reverse. These two features now remain unchanged for all future types. Order of lucky signs is changed, so that conch-shell is now S instead of W. Style of lotus flower changed, with 3 small leaves to 1. and r.

Symbols in outer angles of petals ••"/'•'~» taking the lotus side first, and inscription side last.

^(i) Spokes of wheel in centre of rev. extend to octagon, (ii) Spokes do not extend to octagon. (No spokes) Class D Circa 1896-9. Dod-pal Mint?

Symbols in outer angles of petals *'.'/'.•* * * *.* Otherwise styles as Type C, except that the lotus in Type D(iv) is similar to that used in Type E.

*Ai)* N-^- NE t'>Eïi?SEv$' S ^SWmfW {iJiNW «f No spokes, ^(ii) Nnj» NE E ^ SEiJJ S SWJJ^W ij^NW Spokes, '(iii) N NE E SE S SW W NW -J^'- Spokes. (iv) N NE^j^E SElf& S SW W ^ N W Spokes and diff. lotus. (v) As (iv), but machine struck. Class E Circa 1899-1907. Dod-pal Mint? Symbols in outer angles of petals -• /•••.,( i ) N 4^ NE f|> E i SE ilV S (^ SW ar W '3i^NW -lo/,(ii) N NEf\>E SE S SW W NW (iii) N NE E'i'SE S SW W NW (iiia) As (iii), but centre rotated 45 anti-clockwise, -(iv) N NE E SE ^ S SW W "^ NW (v) As (iv), but style differs and small circle around lotus diam. 7.5 mm. (vi) N NE E SE S ^' SW W NW ^(vii) N NE E SE>^/" S ^ SW W'^ifNW':i\>

All varieties have spokes, E(v ) is the only variety not to have dots left and right of the central lotus, (See main text) A variety of E(iv) has 6 leaves issuing from water at base of lotus, instead of the usual 4. --- Class F Circa 1907-1922, 1924-5. Do-de Mint. Symbols in outer angles of petals • / •. 1907-12 '(i) (ii) (iia) '(iii) (iiia) (iiib) '(iv)

# (V) (vi) 1912-18 ^(Vll),\{viii) (viiia) '(ix) 1918-22 N <3? NE (ii N *E-t* NE \<;v * * *Et*

# NE V\> E • j' S E ijf\{/ SE

# S (^

# N N N N

# NE NE NE NE

# E E E

# SE SEN-ej SE E t ^ SE *-^*

# N ^ NE N NE ^

# SE SE

# N NE Xj'J)' E SE

# S ^

| s | s |
|:--- |:--- |
| s | s |
| sw | sw |
| SE | S '^ sw |
| w ^ | w | s s sw sw SE S *'^* sw w *^* w w w SW sw sw 898 w

# NW NW

# NW

# NW W -»!«> NW '^• NW *'é'* sw W ^ NW

| SW | sw |
|:--- |:--- |
| w | w |
| NW | NW |
| sw\*§e w | N w v \{ ^ | w w

# NW NW sw\*§e w N w v \{ ^

Solid buds. Hollow buds. Hollow buds. Solid buds. Circle diam. c 12mm \*

Circle diam. c 11mm \* Dots 1. & r. of lotus. No dots.

*-Ax) * (xa) (xb) (xc) (xd) (xe) ^ (xi ) (xia) (xib) (xic)

# N S\{$ NE v.'? E \>^ SE

N * * *NEip-* *E* SE N NE\\^ E SE N NE-<il}- E SE

# NE \<,^ El^S SE

| N | N |
|:--- |:--- |
| NE | NE |
| E | E |
| SE | SE |

# NE NE

# E E

# SE SE

## s **s** **s** **s**

**s** ** ** **w** ** ** **^** **w** **sw** ** ** **w** **sw** ** ** **w** **sw** ** ** **w**

# NW **NW** **NW** **NW**.0. S SWl4fe'W NWtiCG' S ^ sw W NW S '^ sw W NW Cruder style.

No dots by lotus. As (x) but reads ^3U. No dots by lotus. Dots by lotus. No dots. 1924-5 ^ ( x i i ) ( x i i a )

NE <?> E -^ SE *'-^ft* S ^ SW ^ **W** NW OB>} Diam. 27mm. Diam. 31mm.

Varieties (iia) and (iiia) are mules between (ii) and (iii).

(iiib) has an obv. die altered from (ii). There is a rev. die-link between (iv) and (v). Varieties (vii), (viii) and (ix) are in fine style. There are numerous varieties of style in (x) and (xi), including
small or large pellets in outer border etc. (xii) has pellets to left and right of base of lotus, in water-line. Class G Circa 1921. Ser-khang Mint.

No symbols in outer angles. Petals on obv. joined. Fine style. No *y'* spokes or dots by lotus. Rev. reads S M. NO varieties in lucky signs. --- Class H Circa 1929-1930. Do-de Mint.

Dot in outer angles. Petals on obv. joined. Machine struck. Three crescents in centre of reverse.

**^ i )** ** ** **S** ***iSSO*** **(ii)** **S u** ** ** **^**

\*F(vi) and F(vii) may not be significantly different types. The Gaden Tangka Appendix II An Analysis of Weight Standards

On the attached table are the weights of 1637 Gaden Tangkas. All
weights are given to the nearest 0.1 gm. The coins weighed are grouped
according to the varieties explained in Appendix I. They are not a
random sample by variety, as rarities may tend to be overrepresented,
but they should not exhibit any bias by weight. In addition I give the
average weight by variety of a lot of 989 coins examined by Carlo Valdettaro

(not previously published). This group of coins was not weighed individ-
ually, and the varieties distinguished did not always agree with my
current classification, but the results are still useful in calculating
a more reliable average weight for each variety (data supplied in correspondence).

Using the given data, and assuming that the standard deviation of weights
with each variety will not be significantly changed by the inclusion
of the Valdettaro data, it is possible to calculate confidence intervals

(i.e. the range within which most of the weights recorded will fall) for
the average weight of each variety. From this it can be deduced which
differences between the average weight of successive classes may only
be due to random error, and which are likely to be due to changes in
the theoretical weight standard used. When the difference between
successive issues does not appear to be significant, the results have
been combined to give more confident predictions of the average weight used for a range of varieties.

This analysis of weights has brought into question the distinction made
between varieties F(vi) and F(vii). In the analysis F(vi) appear to be
as heavy as the early coins of Class F, but F(vii) seems to be signif-
icantly lighter than any other variety of tangka. Such a reduction in
weight standard at this period seems intuitively unlikely, but when
combined with each other, these two varieties show an average weight
very similar to the later coins of Class F. As the design difference
between the two varieties is very small, it is possible that there
really is the only one type, and the distinction used for the analysis
of weights was invalid. Certainly, when weighing coins, it is very
likely that it was not always clear from the design to which variety
a coin belonged, and in such cases there would be a tendency to place
heavy coins in F(vi) and light coins in F(vii), which would distort
the results. The values for these two varieties have, therefore, been
combined and the distinction ignored when estimating the weight
standards. This does not prove that no coins of this issue were struck
to the earlier, higher, weight standard, but merely that there is not
enough data to be certain, and no satisfactory method has been dis-
covered for separating any such early, heavy, pieces purely on design grounds.

The results of this analysis are summarised below based on both my own data and the Valdettaro data:- '. $$ = $$ Date c.1840s c.1880-94 c.1895-96 c.1896-97 c.1897-1901 c.1901-09 c.1910-12 c.1912-18 c.1918-25 c.1921 c.1929-30 ' Class

# A

# B

# C D(i) D(ii) - E(ii) - F(iv) - F(vi) - F(x) -

# G

# H - > E(i) F(iii) (v) (ix) (xii) Number of Coins 95% Confidence Interval for Weight Standard 5.084 4.512 4.441 4.572 4.758 4.627 4.345 4.103 4.204 4.105 4.002 \_ 5.220 4.560 4.529 4.708 4.834 4.699 4.639 4.219 4.306 4.294 4.170

\* i.e. there is only a 5% chance of the weight standard of the given class falling outside the range indicated. --- ***/•***

In a few instances, groups of varieties have been separated above where
the differences are significant at the 10% level, but not at the 5%
level; for example B & C, F(iv) & F(v) compared with E(ii) to F(iii)
and F(vi)-(ix) compared with F(x)-(xii). An analysis of more weights
would be necessary to determine if significant changes in weight
standard really did take place at these times.

A remarkable feature of the coinage is the standard deviation of the
weights around the weight standard. This standard deviation is extremely
high compared with silver coinages in other parts of the world and
shows not only that there was a lack of sophisticated equipment within
the mint, but also how little importance was attached to the actual
silver content of coins by the local Tibetan population. In all cases
the weights exhibit a normal distribution around the mean, with no
trace of the bias which would be apparent if the heaviest coins had
been creamed off into the melting pot at any time.

The main conclusion is that the weight standard did not always reduce,
but actually increased during the late 1890s, and there may have been
another increase after about 1918. Naturally the weight standard should
be analysed together with the %age silver content to determine the
intrinsic value aimed for, but no such analysis has yet been attempted
on a scale large enough for any significant results to be obtained.

It should be mentioned, however, that Sir Charles Bell was told in

1921 that a standard of 2/3rds silver to 1/3rd copper was aimed for which,
if it was achieved, would not differ greatly from the fineness of the

19th century issues. On the other hand, the few readings obtained
using specific gravity methods, indicate a fineness nearer 40% around

1920, but much more work on actual fineness needs to be done. --- Weight in Grammes Weight Distribution of Gaden Tangkas

Average Standard Class 2.8 3,0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 Total weight deviation -.. ii)
i ) i i ) ' ' 5 12 10 16 21 20 19 i i i ) 4 10 5 11 20 7 10 iv) 1 1 7 10 9 14 11 21 18 17 16 19 12 10 -  ii) iii) iv) - -  ii) iii) iv) -  vi) vii)

-  l i ) i i i ) iv) -  v i ) v i i ) v i i i ) ix) -  8 13 14 19 19 18 17, " 9 7 8 10 (xi) 5 10 7 10 F ( x i i ) 5.15 5.16 4.49 4.49 4.53 4.58 4.49 4.67 4.78 4,78 4.79 5.08 4.86 4.61 4.74 4.67 4.38 4.51 4.76

4.67 4.77 4.74 4.47 4.93 4.72 3.99 4.17 4.19 4.26 4.23 4.28 0.17 0.13 0.31 0.24 0.28 0.34 0.25 0.19 0.33 0.21 0.20 0.24 0.37 0.35 0.25 0.38 0.44 0.45 0.36

0.23 0.52 0.39 0.23 0.12 0.34 0.42 0.48 0.47 0.45 0.48 0.35 4.19 0.39 4.10 0.26 --- ***r*** Gaden Tangkas weighed by C. Valdettaro

Total Average Highest Lowest Class Number weight weight ' weight A(i) A(ii) B(i) B(ii) &B(iii) B(iv)

# C D(i) D(ii) D(iii) D(iv) D(v) E(i) E(ii) E(iii) E(iv) E(v) E(vi) E(vii) F(i) F(ii) F(iii) F(iv) F(v) F(vi) &F(vii) F(viii) &F(x) F(ix) &F(xi) F(xii)

# G

# H - - - "^ 4.37 4.55 4.54 4.47 **4.60** 4.83 4.73 4.65 4.86 4.67 4.66 4.70 4.53 5.15 4.84 4.65 4.58 4.42 4.25 4.23 4.25 4.19 4.31 4.22 4.0 5.2 5.2 4.9 5.15 5.4 5.15 5.3 5.6 5.05 5.3 5.4 5.45 5.25 5.05 5.75 6.4 5.4 5.2 4.9 5.0 3.6 3.65 3.85 4.1 4.35 4.1 3.5 **4.15** 4.15 4.0 3.85 3.95 5.0 4.1 3.15 2.9 3.05 2.65 3.55 3.5

For some varieties the highest and lowest weights were not calculated.

In some instances, the classification of varieties used did not coincide with the system used in this paper, so combined results have had to be given. In cases where the two varieties may have been struck to different weight standards, the above results have had to be ignored in the main analysis of weight standards. --- Bibliography

1. C Bell (Sir), Manuscript Diary, British Library.

2. W Carey, 1902, Travel and Adventure in Tibet.

3. S C Das, 1892, Journey to Lhasa and Central Tibet.

4. H A Jaeschke, 1881, Tibetan-English Dictionary, p.281. 5. F Kempf, 1969, Native Tibetan Coins.

6. T de Lacouperie, 1881, The Silver Coinage of Tibet, Numismatic Chronicle, 3rd series. Vol. I, p.340-353.

7. W J Ottley, 1906, With Mounted Infantry in Tibet, p.230.

8. I S Rawat 1973, Indian Explorers of The Nineteenth Century, p

9. N G Rhodes, 1978, Tibetan Mints (ONS Information Sheet No.19).

10. Spink & Son Ltd, 1895, Numismatic Circular, Feb. Col. 1052.

11. G C Tsybikoff, 1918, Buddhist Palomnik i Swiatyn Tibeta.

12. L A Waddell, 1906, Lhasa and its Mysteries, p.427.

13. E M C Walsh, 1907, The Coinage of Tibet, Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. II, No.2, p.11-23.

14. Weir, Manuscript Reports, Indian Office Library.

15. R S Yeoman, 1974, A Catalog of Modern World Coins, 11th Ed. --- **/ -**

# /AOO **D(v)** **E(v)** **E(v.)**

F6i0 FCx\*)