# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY **APRIL 1993 **

# OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 29

# INDEX OF INTERESTING ITEMS

PUBLISHED IN THE ONS NEWSLETTER FROM 1976 TO 1992

## Compiled by Ken Wiggins

The last Index was published in Newsletters 87 and 88. This has now been incorporated in this present index and it is proposed to publish an index of the year's contributions annually from now on.

Abbasid - two rare fractional dirhems - a dinar of Al Mustazhir  Abbasid Governors of Tanaristan

- Afzut issues  Abbasid-Sassaman - coinage of Seistan Abhira and Gupta - lead coins Adharbaijan - a rare Umayyad dirhem Adil Shahi Dynasty - an unusual copper coin 76

- of Bijapur - a gold fanam  Afghan - copper coins, mediaeval - medal  -medal - medal  Ahmadabad - pice of the East India Company 73 Jul. Jan.

Nov. Aug.. Dec. Aug. Feb. Oct. Nov. Jan. Mar. Nov. Aug. Dec. Aug. Jul. Jun. Dec. Jul. Dec. Jul. Aug. Aug. Feb. Dec. Jun. Sep. May

Akbar - Mughal copper coins of Balapur Akbar Shah - Mughal puppet, coins of Algeria

- a new denomination of Abdul Qadir  Almora - coin of Rana Bahadur of Nepal - coins of Girvan Yuddha of Nepal  American Numismatic Society

- information on  - Islamic photo file  Amravati (Amroati)

- mint of the Nizam of Hyderabad  Amulet - Siamese? Ancient India - solitary reverse symbols Ancient Northern India - cast copper coinage 70

- single punch marked coppers  Animal Weights - Burmese Annam - cash in the name of the Mmg emperors Apollodotus II - new com Arab-Byzantine

- coinage of Huns, die study  Nov. Arab Coinage

- denominations on contemporary coins 73  Aug. Arab-Sassanian

- drachm of Abdullah ibn al-Zubair  - dirhem of Governor Muhammad  - Khanjite propaganda silver drachm  - coin of Yazid ibn al-Muhallah  Arabian Peninsula

- ancient dated coins from  Arakan - two new types of rupees 5 9 - coins "Lord of the White Elephant"  - four new coins of the Mrohaung dynasty 77  - coins of the Mrohaung dynasty  - - Chittagong  - - Trilingual  - - early coins  '112 - King Thiridthudhamma's coins  Arcot (Arkat) - double rupee of - Nawabs of, mysterious mint, Muazimabad

Assam - die study of certain coins Aurangzeb - silver rupee of Sholapur Azes I - Zeus and Pallas on coins of Jun. Oct. Oct. Feb.

Feb. Apr. Jun. Apr. Dec. Jun. Oct. May Sep. Nov. Apr. Sep. Jun. Mar.

Babur (Mughal) - early countermarked coin Bahmamd Sultans - coin of Ismail Shah Balapur - Akbar's copper coins Baroda - three pattern coins BBA & Balkh - Sassanian, historical evidence  Bengal

- unusual tanka of Jalal-ud-dm Fath Shah  Bengal Sultans - fractional tankas Benkulen - East India Company's coins of Bhutan - corns of

- an 18th century rupee  - overstrikes on coins  - new type of copper coin  Bijapur

- gold fanam of the Adil Shah dynasty  - unusual copper coin of Ibrahim II  Birmingham Mint

- Chinese Impenal coins struck at  Borneo - iron bullet money

- iron bullet money  - iron bullet money  - iron bullet money  - iron bullet money  Burma

- early coinage & Bodawpaya's re-strikes  - new Pyu coins and modem fabrications  - lead coins of Pegu  - animal weights  - coins in ANS collection  - symbolic coins  - modem silver forgeries  Bushby Sahib - coins of Rewah

- continuation  Bust, Turks of - coins of Buwayhid - fractional dirhem from Tabaristan May Apr. Dec. Sep. 103 Nov. Feb. Aug. Sep. Feb. Jul. Nov. Aug. Oct. Feb. Jul. Dec. Feb. Jun. Oct. Sep.

Oct. Jun. Feb. Jun. Oct. Jan. Jul. Feb. Apr. Sep. 134 Aug.

50 Aug. Caffa (Crimea) - Genoese coin issues Cast Copper Coinage

- ancient Northern India  Dec. Chamba - an 18th century com Feb. China - a note on the use of coinage in the 17th century

Apr. - a packsaddle sycee, c 1913-33  - 1933 Sun Yat-sen dollar variety  - seed cash  - Mukden 20 and 10 cash coins of 1922 - engraved presentation pieces, 1853-1912

- - 1853-1912  - - 1853-1912  -1910 coinage and the Vienna mint - Chmese cash patterns  - Chien Yu of the Ch'u State  - Cash coins index  - Szechuan mihtary dollar variety  - Kann 28b, common variety Oct. Feb. Feb. Dec. Aug. Oct. Feb. Jun. Sep. Nov. Nov Jan. May
China - Southern Sung cash Jul - Kwangtung cash struck in Birmingham 107  Jul machine minted T'ung Chih cash Jul - Kiangnan Arsenal copper mint, Shanghai

Nov - Liao Dynasty, copper object  Jan - military piscifonn tally  May - Imperial specimen coins and medals etc

Jul - etymological & cultural background of cash comage

Jan - universal coin unifies empire  Nov - Northern Sung, Chih Pmg, unlisted script variety

Mar - Guangxi mint during Qian Long  Aug - Tang Chi-yao half dollar, forgotten variety

Nov - thousand character corns of Guang Xu  Feb - sycee mgots, new catalogue of  May Kuche, Bao Xin mint Aug Chinese/Siamese Pee coins (gambling tokens)

Nov Chittagong coins of the Mrofiaung dynasty, Arakan

Jun Chudasama Dynasty, Gujerat, India - coins of

Chupperbund Counterfeiters - India Cis Sutlej States - two nazarana coins Cochin - India, coins of

Colloquium on Islamic Numismatics - report 42 Cooch Behar
minor denominations of the coinage Cownes - world's first cash Dhar State - early copper coins

- early copper coins  Durrani unusual copper coin of Peshawar Dutch East India Company Japanese coins in South Vietnam East India Co

- weights for the Fanukhabad rupee  - Ahmadabad pice  - Bengal, rupees in base meral  - Bengal, countermarked pai sikkas  - corns of Benkulen, Sumatra  Eastern Turkestan coinage - silver coin  - silver com Aug Jun Jun Oct Apr Jul Jan Feb Oct Mar Nov

Apr Aug \] Nov \] Mar 1 Sep 1 Oct Jun Aug Egypt striking of large silver coins m the 18th century

- two rare Misr akces  Eukratides - new mint monogram

Fabrications Mughal rupees - India, Rajasthan coins  Farrukhabad - E I Co rupee weights

Fas - Spanish-Islamic, new name on coin of 107 Forgenes Sikkim paisa - Sikkim, Tibet, Ancient India, Jaipur  - Tibet, Tripura  - Ceylon

Spanich Islamic coins - Chandra kings of Arakan  - rare early Islamic dinars  - Islamic gold coins  - Sino-Tibetan 'Lukuan' rupee Nejd countermark on Mana Theresa dollars

- Indian punch-marked corns  - Burmese coins  - Tibetan copper coins  French India double rupees of Pondicherry French Indo Chma - puzzlmg coin of - 1920, fiasco crises Feb Aug Mar

May May Apr Jul Jun Aug Oct Dec Dec Aug Feb Jun Dec Aug Mar Jul Sep Oct Jul Sep 1

Gakkar Tribe (Pakistan) - copper corns of Gambling Tokens - Chinese/Siamese Garhwal - a ti-masha of Pradip Shah - a hoard of ti mashas
gold coins of Sudarshan Shah Genoese coin issues at Caffa in the Cnmea Georgia - dirhem struck at Tiflis AH 651 Gha/navid & Samanid drrhems Gujerat - silver tankas of Mazaffar Shah I
silver tankas of Mazaffar Shah 1 - Sultans of, earliest dated coin  Gupta & Abhira - lead coins Gupta - gold staters gold stater of Prakasaditya Gwalior State - Lashkar mmt, unpublished gold coin

Oct Nov Nov \] Nov Aug Aug Apr Aug Jun Feb Nov Dec Oct Oct 1 Jun

Hafsids - fractional dinars of Abu Fans Mar Haidar Ah - Mysore, Malabar fanam Aug Hardwar - Muhammad Akbar Shah (pretender), coins of

May - Akbar Shah (pretender), coins of  Aug Hims, Syria early Islamic coinage May Honorary Members of ONS Aug Hosein Quli Khan Qajar (Iran) - first known coin

Sep Humayun - India, vassalage coinage Sep Hyderabad State date list of gold coins Apr Hyderabad Numismatic Society - information  Feb

Index - ONS Newsletters 1976 1983 Dec - ONS Newsletters 1976-1983, part II  Feb Indian Institute of Research m Numismatic Studies

Feb Indian Princely States some interesting coins Indo-Greek new com of ApoIIodotus II Azes I, Zeus & Pallas on coins - Azes II, initial Pallas coinage  Indo-Greek & Indo Parthian - coin hoards - coin hoards, part II  Indo-Parthian - Indravarma & Gondophares 131 Indo-Scythic - mint marks - city goddess types  Indonesia - "Windmill coin" - plantation tokens  - numismatic fantasies, iron bullet money 72  - numismatic fantasies, iron bullet money 74  - tahsman  pecuhar lead cash from token from Soembawa International Numismatic Conference, London, - Brussels, 1991  Iran - Hosein Quli Khan Qajar, first known com of

Sep - the missing quarter qiran of 1305  Dec Iranian Numismatics
books published m Iran - books published in Iran  books published m Iran Islamabad Mathura, India - corns struck at Islamic Silver Coins

- with readjusted weights  Jun Ismail Shah - Bahmanid, billon coin Apr

Jabalpur, India - rupees of Jan Jahandar Shah, India

- new mints, Alamgrrpur and Kabul  Jun Jahangu-, India rupee of Jalnapur Jun - a new Mughal sultam  Nov Jalnapur, India a rupee of Jahangir Jun Japan pattern multiple cash May - pattern multiple cash, a reply  May

Jan May Mar May Jul Dec Nov Mar Jul Apr Aug Jun Oct Sep May Jun Nov Nov Jun Oct Feb Jun --- Japanese coins in South Vietnam
and the Dutch East India Company Nov. Java - coin of Feb. - early cash coins  Jun. - British medal struck in  Feb Jhar - on Sikh coin Apr. Jhmd or Jind State - commemorative rupee Jun.

Kakuyid - a du-hem of Isfahan AH 424 Kakwayhid - two unpublished dirhems Kangra, India - paisa from Kashmir - Mughal coins of - native coinage, late 19th century  - Dogra Rajahs, gold 1/4 mohur  - Paramandi & Pratapa Deva, coins of  Kashmir Sultans, notes on the coins of

-Parti - Part II  - Part III  -Partrv -PartV Kathmandu, Nepal - mint tokens Khalaf Ibn Ahmad, Sistan - firactional gold com Khmer, S. E. Asia - lead coins

- lead coins, further note on  - lead coins, further note on  Khwarism Shahs - a Mansuri dirhem Kiangnan Arsenal - mint at Shanghai 1905 Kotah, India - gold 1/2 mohur Krishna Raja Wodeyar, Mysore - 25 cash copper

Kuche Mint - Sinkiang, China Kutch State, India - two new corns Ladakh, India - copper coins of

- copper coins of  - copper coins of  Larin Money - early references to Larins - hoard from the North Konkan,

- short note on  Las Belas - coinage of Lenjah, Iran - coin of Liao Dynasty - copper object India Nov, Feb Jun. Aug. Fet. Jul. Jul. Sep. Nov. Jan. Mar. May Oct.

Sep. Dec. Jun. Jan Nov. Nov. Jul. coin Feb. Aug. Mar. Oct. Jun Oct. Apr. Apr. Oct. Feb. Nov. Jan. Macassar, Indonesia

- early coinage of the Sultans  Feb. Madura - gold tanka of the Sultan Adil Shah 117 Mar Malabar - fanam of Haidar Ah Aug. Maldive Islands - last native coinage of Dec. Malwa - observations on the coins of Muhammad II

Jan. Marathas of Tanjore - gold fanams struck by 58 Feb. Manmd - four dirhems of Abd al Haqq Sep. Masuhpatan - unpubUshed 1/16 rupee Feb. Mrohaung Dynasty, Arakan - four new coins 77 Apr. - Chittagong coins  Jun. - trilingual coins  Oct. Muazimabad - mint of Nawabs of Arcot Apr. Mughal - gold & silver coins of Kashmir Aug. - coins of Qandahar in the Deccan, India  7 6 Feb. - some rare coins  Feb. - two interesting rupees  Feb. - 1/32 rupee of Aurangzeb, Akbarabad  Sep. - rupee of Ahmad Shah of Koilkunda  S ep. - Akbar Shah, puppet king, coins of  Jul. - rare coins of Akbar & Rafi-ud Darjat  Jan. - rare corns of Akbar, Aurangzeb, Shah Alam II

Mar. Mughal Miscellany - unusual Mughal coins 104 Jan. - unusual Mughal coins  Mar. Muhammad III bin Tughlaq, India

- 14th century mule  **Apr. ** Muhammad Shah, Mughal - rare rupee of Murshedabad  Mar.

Muhammad bin Sam - horseman tankas 1 29 Mukden, China - 20 & 10 cash coins of 1922 69 Muminabad-Bmdraban, India

- coins struck at  Museums - coin collections in Mysore - coins countennarked GB - 25 cash of Knshna Raha Wodeyar

Nabha, India - a rupee of - a rupee of, a rejoinder  Naga Kings - a note on the coins of Narwar, Gwahor State - unpublished rupee of 62 Nawanagar, India - pattern 5 kori piece Nepal - Kathmandu mint tokens - pattern portrait coins, Prithvi Vir Vikram Nepal

- new copper coin from  - mysterious copper corns from  Nepalese Coins - struck in Almora struck in Almora Netherlands East Indies

- unpublished pattern 25 cent  Nimak - Sikh mint identified North Afghan Dynasty - new coins of North Africa, mediaeval Islamic miscellany 130

Packsaddle sycee, China - c. 1912-1933 Paithan - coins of Vigra, unkkown ruler Parthia - new variety of drachm - Tanhs Mardates, new ruler  Pee Tokens - Siamese gamblmg coins - Chinese/Siamese  -Chinese/Siamese - Chinese/Siamese  - Chinese/Siamese  - Chinese/Siamese  Pegu, Burma - lead coins Plantation Tokens - Indonesian hoard Pondicherry - double rupees struck at Potin Coins - India Pradip Shah, Garhwal, India - silver ti-masha

Prakasaditya, Gupta - rare gold stater Punch Marked

- single punch marked copper coins  - silver coins of Saurashtra  - forgeries  Punjab - mediaeval coins of, derivation of jitals

Pyu Corns, Burma - further new coins - modem fantasies Jun. 1 Dec. \] Jun. Apr. 1 Apr. Feb. 1 Nov. 1 Aug. 1 May \] Oct. May Oct. Jan. Mar. Aug. Jun. Dec. Jul. Jun. Sep. Aug.

ONS Congress, Nagpur, India - report Mar. Ottoman - overstnkes on European crowns Dec. - large copper coins  Aug. - zinc coins  Oct. - tokens  Oct. - square akces of Tunis  Aug. - new akces  May - rare handstruck para of Ahmad III  Aug. - two rare Misr akces  Aug. Oubeh - unrecorded Islamic mint place Sep.

Oct. Jul. May May Jan. Mar. Mar, Sep. Nov. Nov. Feb. Aug. Oct. Dec. Nov. Oct. Dec. Oct. Mar. Sep. Jun. Jun.

Qajar, Iran - earliest coin of Tabaristan Jul. Qandahar - Deccan mint of the Mughals Feb. Qunduz - Timurid copper coins of Dec. Ras Bab al Mandab - countermarked coins. Rewah State, India - Bushby Sahib

- Bushby Sahib  Royal Asiatic Society - information Roman - terracotta lockets based on Roman coins Shaikh Sa'id Aug. Feb. Apr. Sep. Sep. 1988
Sa'adian - dirhem struck at Tilimsan May Safavid, Iran - a rare royal fals Jan. Sallarid - dirhem of Abu Nasr Justan ibn Sbarmazan

Mar. Sanianid & Ghaznavid - dirhems Aug. Sambak, NW Borneo - coin of? Dec. - coin of?  Feb. - coin reattributed to Lenjah  Nov. Sassanian - mint of BBA and Balkh Nov. Satakami - note on a silver portrait coin May Satavahana - Sri Sata coins 5 1 Oct. - Roman influence on coins  May Satkami - new type coin with bull Feb. Saurashtra - punch marked silver coins Oct. Seistan - Arab-Sassanian coinage of Aug. Seljuq - Sultan Siyavus, coin of May Shah Jahan I, Mughal

- 1/2 rupee of Akbarabad  Jun. Shanghai, China - copper mint 1905 Nov. Sheikh Sa'id

- Ras Bab al Mandab, coins c. 1890  Aug. Sholapur, India - rupee of Aurangzeb Jun. Siamese Amulet Aug. Siamese Pee Tokens - gambling tokens Jan. Sijistan - Sassanian style drachms May Sikh - coin with a jhar Apr. - gold & silver coinage of, Amritsar  Oct. - rare 1/4 rupee of Kashmir  Oct. - coins with Ranjit Singh's effigy  Mar. - new gold coins  Jun. - Nimak mint identified  Jun. - square rupee of Ranjit Singh  Nov. Sikkim - forgeries of the paisa Jun. Sindh - coinage from AD 250 Jan. - Mirza Muhammad Baqi, copper coins of 129 Jun.  Sistan - fractional gold coin of Khalaf ibn Ahmad

Sep. Southern Sung, China - aberrant dating on cash coins

Jul. Strato III - coinage identified Mar. Sudarshan Shah, Garhwal - gold coins of Aug. Sultans of Delhi - 14th century mule of Muhammad III

Aug. Suns, India - 1/4 rupee of Sher Shah Sep. Swat, Pakistan - early mediaeval coins of Jun. Sycee - Chinese ingots, catalogue of May Szechuan, China - military dollar variety Jan.

Tabaristan - Afzut issues of Abbasid governors TaUsmans - Indonesia, iron

- Indonesia, iron  Tanjore, Marathas - gold fanams of Taxila - two interesting overstruck coins Thirithudhamma, Arakan - coins of

121 Nov. 108 Sep. 109 Nov. 58 Feb. 52 Dec. 120 Sep. Tibet - a Sino-Tibetan countermark

- grain tokens  - two pattern coins  - two rare coins  - forgeries of copper coins  - Tarn coins from  Tientsin, China - proposed token coinage Timurid - coins of Qunduz Tokens - enigmatic, Egypt & Turkey Tonk State, India - new type of copper coin Toweelahs, larins - a short note on

- non-destructive analysis  Trichanapalli - new Mughal mint, Aurangzeb

Tripura, India - an unpubhshed Muslim rupee 57 Tunis - square Ottoman akces Turkestan, Eastern - coinage of Turkey - republican coinage, classification

Ujjain, India - rare coin from Aug. - frogs and tortoises on coins of  Aug. Umayyad - dirhems not in Walker, Harat, Arminiyya &

Feb. Feb. Mar. May Sep. Mar. Dec. Dec. Jun. Aug. Oct. Apr. Mar. Dec. Aug. Oct. Aug.

Ifnqiyya etc. - two unique dirhems, Ralsa, Manadhir  - dirhem not in Walker, Istakhr  - a mystery mint, al Rawani?  - coinage of the Maghrib  Urumchi - coins struck at Kuche, China Valencia - Balansia, rare Islamic coin of

- Balansia, rare Islamic coin of  Vidisha, India - a city state, coins of Vienna Mint - 1910 Chinese coinage Vietnam - new coins of Vigra - unknown ruler of Paithan, India, coins of Mar. Jul. Sep. Mar. Feb. Aug. Nov. May Jul. Jun. Jul. Jul.

Wattasid - silver dirhams Jun. Western Hsia Dynasty - large coin Feb. - large com  Nov. Western Satraps - early dating evidence Jun. - Chastana, lead coins  Mar. What Is It? Apr. - ditto  Jun. World of Islam Festival 1976 - colloquium on Islamic numismatics  Apr. Yajnasri Satakami - Roman influence on coins

May Yazid ibn al Muhallab - Arab-Sassanian coin 94 Feb. Yuan Dynasty - unpublished coin of Nov.

Zeionises - tetradrachm of Zirid - dinar of Mu'izz ibn Badis Jun. Jan.

## This index has been sponsored and produced by Galata Coins The Old White Lion

## Market Street

## Llanfyllin Powys SY22 5BX, U.K.

## Buying good quality coins and secondhand numismatic books.

Lists of coins and new and secondhand books, available from time to time.

## Specialist typesetting and printing. Numismatic photography.