# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY **Occasional Paper no. 18 **

# SCRIPT STYLES USED ON TRADITIONAL CHINESE COINS **Joe Cribb (London), February 1984 **
The majority of Chinese coin inscriptions are written in the regular script seen in most Chinese
printed books. There are however many coins written in other scripts which are not so familiar and
rarely used in print. The regular script is known in Chinese as kai shu, literally Pattern Script.

The others are called zhuan shu - Seal Script, li shu - Clerk's Script, xing shu - Cursive Script,
and cao shu - Grass Script. Some of the coins bearing these alternative scripts do so for
historical reasons - they were issued before Pattern Script came into regular use in official
inscriptions - while others do so for aesthetic reasons, as their issuers wished to ornament the
coins with elegant designs. In some cases an issue of coins was made with the same inscription
written in a variety of different scripts in order to distinguish the separate batches of the issue.

Changes of style and detail within a particular script were also used for the same purpose. These
distinctions were made so that control could be maintained over the officials and workmen
responsible for each batch. If any coins were found to be deficient in weight or alloy, the
distinguishing features allowed them to be traced back to a particular batch.

The earliest coins are all inscribed in Seal Script. This script is named after its later use in
seal inscriptions, but at the time of the earliest coins it was the script in regular use. Seal

Script was developed as a systematised version of the earliest form of Chinese writing, gu wen -

Archaic Script. Originally designed for inscriptions scratched on bone, the Archaic Script evolved
as It began to be written on other media. The most commonly found examples of Archaic Script
surviving to the present date are moulded inscriptions on bronze vessels. Most of these
inscriptions retained the basic character outlines of the bone inscriptions but were formed with
more evenly drawn lines and the sharp corners of the earlier characters were rounded. These changes
were a reflection of the different techniques and tools used to engrave the moulds for the bronze
vessels in contrast to those used to mark bone. Because new characters were still being created
during this period there was a considerable amount of variation between the character forms used by
different scribes in different regions. This allowed a very rapid expansion of the script, but also led to much confusion.

During the reign of the Zhou king Xuan (827-781 BC), an attempt was made to consolidate the
achievements of the Archaic Script by removing the confusion. An official court recorder Zhou
published an official version of each character form. His new character forms were derived from the
repertoire of the Archaic Script characters used in bronze inscriptions. In general they represent
a more abstracted version of the pictographs. His new script is known as the Great Seal Script

(da zhuan shu - the "Great" is to distinguish it from a subsequent reform of this creation). The
first coin inscriptions are written in this script.

With a few exceptions the early inscriptions are very untidily made. Although the standardisation
of the Great Seal Script had eliminated many of the confusions of the Archaic Script, the political
situation in China at the time of the earliest coin inscriptions had eroded the attempt to bring
about a unified standard script. China was divided into many small feudal states and although there
was some movement of scholars from state to state, these divisions lead to a renewed diversity in
the use of the Great Seal Script. In general the coins of this period show a very pragmatic
approach on the part of their makers to the inscriptions. The inscriptions were put on the coins
for a practical reason and little attention was paid to the aesthetics of the script. There were
many variations in the execution of the same character and occasionally characters were even written in reverse.

In a few rare instances some attention was paid to the style of the inscription. Neat, well formed
characters in a carefully arranged inscription appear on a few hoe and knife coins. These are
perhaps early signs of a realisation that the Great Seal Script was no longer a practical standard.

The remedy to the erosion of the standards set by Great Seal Script came about at an opportune point
in China's political history which allowed it to have a lasting effect. The political situation
which had brought about the decay of the standard Seal Script of the Zhou court was finally resolved
by the unification of the feudal states into China's first Empire under the rule of Qin Shi Huang

Di, Lord of Qin State, who made himself the first Emperor of China. His Prime Minister, Li Si, was
instructed to unify the writing system of the new Empire. This reform tidied Seal Script by
simplifying its character outlines and standardising character components. Because the characters
tended to have less details, the new script is known as the Small Seal Script (xiao zhuan shu). The

Qin Emperor also ordered the coinage to be reformed and the inscription on this new coins was written in the new official Seal Script.

The Seal Script devised for the Qin Emperor provided the model for all subsequent Seal Script
inscriptions on Chinese coins down to the last regular Seal Script issue made during the early Qing
period by the rebel Wu Sangui (AD 1678). The characters of the Small Seal Script were regularly
formed, each occupying a hypothetical square space in an inscription and drawn with lines of even
thickness in straight or uniform curves. Although the outline and detail of each character were
laid down by Li Si's standardisation, individual writers were able to retain considerable stylistic
freedom. Small adjustments to the position, attitude and shape of the details allowed artists to
create their own stylistic versions of Seal Script. From the Han period such small changes helped
to distinguish different issues of coins. Later similar effects were also employed to create coins
which were masterpieces of the calligrapher's art.

Seal Script was essentially for inscriptions in stone and metal and not suited to pen writing. The
creation of the Chinese Empire by the Qin dynasty and its subsequent consolidation by the Han
created an increasing demand for hand-written documents. To cater for this a new script was devised
for writing with a pen. Its invention is attributed to Chang Miao (246-207 BC), an official of the

Qin emperor. It was not given official recognition during the Qin period, but became the accepted
script for official documents during the Han period. Because of its official use it came to be
known as Clerk's Script (li shu). The character outlines of this new script were derived from the

Small Seal Script, but many character components were simplified or relocated in order to facilitate
a more fluid writing technique. Handwriting was executed with a small brush using a black (soot
based) ink. The lines of the characters were drawn as a series of brush strokes, making lines,
dots, hooks etc, arranged to create the outline. The brush strokes were applied in a particular
order normally working from the top left hand corner to the bottom right hand corner. By following
this conventional order and retaining the basic outline different writers could achieve a uniformity
which made their writing universally legible. As with Seal Script the conventions of the Clerk's
Script did not inhibit the personal stylistic inventiveness of individual artists. Although the

Clerk's Script was fully developed during the Han period, it did not come into general use in coin
inscriptions until the Tang period (from AD 621). There are however a few instances in the
intervening period when Clerk's Script inscriptions were used, such as on a variety of the tai ping
bai qian issue of the Western Jin (AD 274). From the Tang period until the early Song it was
consistently used for most coin inscriptions, but from the end of the 10th century its use declined
so that by the end of the Northern Song period it had virtually disappeared from coin inscriptions.

There is only one instance of the use of Clerk's Script on a Chinese coin after the Song period;
this is on an issue of the Ming prince Fu Wang in AD 1644.

In coin inscriptions Clerk's Script tended to be written in a style which belied its origin as an
adaptation of Seal Script for everyday hand-written use. The nature of the technique used to make
coins. I.e. casting in moulds which were ultimately made from engraved masters, encouraged a less
fluid handling of the script than found in its penned versions. Although coin inscriptions in

Clerk's Script adhere to the character outlines and details of that script, the regularity and
symmetry of this treatment creates an impression similar to Small Seal Script. The expressive
flourishes of the brush which characterise a good Clerk's Script calligrapher's hand are not to be
found in the tightly drawn coin inscriptions. The regularity of Clerk's Script in the context of
coin inscriptions did not however prevent the utilisation of stylistic variation both to enhance the
appearance of the coins and to distinguish issues.

The decline of Clerk's Script during the Song period was a consequence of the increasing choice of
alternative scripts which, like Clerk's Script, had been developed for writing with a brush pen.

These alternatives were all derived during the Han period from Clerk's Script by further
simplification of its outlines in order to render them more suitable for rapid writing by pen. One
of these scripts became so widely used that it replaced Clerk's Script as the standard script for
official documents. It is known as Pattern Script (kai shu) or Regular Script (zheng shu) as a
consequence of its official use. It was later also to provide the model for printed Chinese and is
the form in which the written Chinese language is normally taught. The construction and execution
of characters in this script are closely modelled on that of Clerk's Script, but each mark of the
pen is more clearly distinguishable. The characters seem however to be more tightly and sharply
contained within an imaginary square than those of Clerk's Script.

Although Pattern Script originated in the Han period and was widely used by official scribes during
the Tang period, it did not appear in coin inscriptions until after the fall of the Tang dynasty.

The first significant issue in this script was the tang guo tong bao coin of the Southern Tang
dynasty (c. AD 963). The Song dynasty followed this lead shortly after. By the end of the Song
period virtually all coin inscriptions were written in Pattern Script and continued to be so until
the end of China's traditional coinage. As with Seal and Clerk's Script, stylistic variations
appear in Pattern Script coin inscriptions both as a consequence of the different artists designing
them and as an intentional system of identifying different batches or issues with the same inscription.
The two other new s c r i p t s i n t r o d u c e d i n t o coin i n s c r i p t i o n s during the Song p e r i o d were Cursive

S c r i p t (xing shu) and Grass S c r i p t (cao shu). Like P a t t e r n S c r i p t, these had both been devised
during the Han period as v e r s i o n s of C l e r k ' s S c r i p t more s u i t e d to pen w r i t i n g. While P a t t e r n

Script retained the formal c l a r i t y of Clerk's Script for documentary use. Cursive and Grass Script
were developed for rapid informal writing. They retained the basic character o u t l i n e s of Clerk's

S c r i p t in order to remain l e g i b l e, but the d e t a i l s were run t o g e t h e r to i n c r e a s e the speed of
w r i t i n g. P a t t e r n S c r i p t c h a r a c t e r s l i k e those of C l e r k ' s S c r i p t were each w r i t t e n as a s e r i e s of
s m a l l i n d i v i d u a l brush s t r o k e s, but in Cursive S c r i p t the brush merely l e f t the paper between
characters and in Grass S c r i p t i t rarely l e f t the paper at a l l.

| Cursive S c r i p t is said to have been invented by the c a l l i g r a p h e r | Liu Desheng in the l a t e r Han |
|:--- |:--- |
| period, developing his character forms from Clerk's Script. | His inventions were so popular for day |
| to day use t h a t they were soon adopted for the rapid w r i t i n g of P a t t e r n S c r i p t forms as w e l l. | These |
period, developing his character forms from Clerk's Script. His inventions were so popular for day
to day use t h a t they were soon adopted for the rapid w r i t i n g of P a t t e r n S c r i p t forms as w e l l. These
l a t e r adaptations are more commonly used now. Because of i t s treatment of the d e t a i l within each
c h a r a c t e r. Cursive S c r i p t is w e l l s u i t e d to the development of i n d i v i d u a l s t y l e s. By the time i t
was f i r s t i n s c r i b e d on coins in the e a r l y Northern Song p e r i o d Cursive S c r i p t had been in use for at
l e a s t seven centuries. These Song coins with Cursive Script i n s c r i p t i o n s are among some of the more
v i s u a l l y a t t r a c t i v e coins in the Chinese s e r i e s. However, a f t e r the Song p e r i o d. Cursive S c r i p t
v i r t u a l l y disappears from the coinage. The l a s t use of t h i s s c r i p t was by the rebel Koxinga (Zheng

Chenggong) on his yong l i tong bao coins issued c. AD 1661.

Grass S c r i p t made only a b r i e f appearance in coin i n s c r i p t i o n s. I t i s thought to have been
o r i g i n a l l y invented by the Han Emperor Zhang (AD 76-89) for use in rough drafts of documents. This
s c r i p t IS so rapid and f l u i d t h a t only the b a r e s t o u t l i n e s remain of the o r i g i n a l C l e r k ' s S c r i p t
characters i t is modelled upon. Because of the resulting lack of c l a r i t y to the untrained eye, i t
was not p a r t i c u l a r l y s u i t e d to o f f i c i a l i n s c r i p t i o n s such as those on c o i n s. The use of Grass

S c r i p t was t h e r e f o r e adopted for only two i s s u e s of the e a r l y Northern Song p e r i o d, both of the
reign of the Emperor Tai Zong (AD 976-998). The freedom Grass Script gave to individual writers has
made i t a favourite of c a l l i g r a p h e r s, but i t was t h i s feature of both Grass and Cursive Script that limited their use on coins.

The intentional use of v a r i a t i o n s in s c r i p t and style to distinguish d i f f e r e n t issues began in the

Tang p e r i o d. The ** kai** yuan tong bao coins of the e a r l y Tang were i s s u e d over a long period a t
numerous mints and minor changes in the d e t a i l of the i n s c r i p t i o n s were used t o g e t h e r with small
c o n t r o l marks to i d e n t i f y the d a t e and mint of these i s s u e s. The p r e c i s e s i g n i f i c a n c e of t h e s e
i d e n t i f i e r s is now l o s t, but i t is clear from their consistent use that the mint authorities were
making s y s t e m a t i c use of them for a d m i n i s t r a t i v e purposes. Modern s c h o l a r s a r e able to d e t e c t
s i m i l a r changes in e a r l i e r c o i n s and use them to s e p a r a t e d i f f e r e n t i s s u e s of c o i n s, such as the
wu zhu c o i n s of the e a r l y Han from those of the l a t e r Han, but t h e s e changes appear to r e p r e s e n t
s t y l i s t i c d e v e l o p m e n t and t h e p e r s o n a l hands of t h e mould m a k e r s r a t h e r than c o n s c i o u s administrative action.
The Southern Tang dynasty developed a novel means of administrative control through inscriptional
variations. The tang guo tong bao coins of AD 966 were issued with either Pattern or Seal Script
inscriptions to distinguish the two parts of the issue.

The Song dynasty also adopted this procedure in AD 990 with the issue of chun hua yuan bao coins in

Clerk's, Cursive and Grass Script. Song issues after this frequently made use of such distinctions
for administrative purposes. Most issues of this type were in two different scripts: Seal and

Clerk's script, Seal and Pattern, Seal and Cursive, and Clerk's and Pattern; some had three
different - Seal, Pattern and Cursive or Seal, Clerk's and Pattern - and even four: Seal, Clerk's, Pattern and Cursive.

Alongside this procedure further administrative distinguishing marks were applied to the coins by
minor alterations to details of the characters in the inscription, in the same way as on Tang period
coins. Except for the occasional use of the different scripts on Jin dynasty and Ming rebel coins,
the use of minor detail changes remained the main technique of marking coins for administrative
purposes other than alterations of the inscription. As more information was put into coin
inscriptions this method of identifying particular issues had very restricted use until the Late

Ming period when it was brought back into full use as a means of regulating the increased volume and
bureaucracy of coin production. From this period until the end of the Qing dynasty it is known from
administrative records that minor calligraphic variations were used to indicate to mint officials
which part of an issue a particular coin belonged to. The coin inscriptions gave the issue era and
the mint name, but when an issue era could last up to 60 years and a mint could operate from four
different locations each producing millions of coins in a year, it was necessary to use these
calligraphic variations in order to keep such massive issues within the legal requirements. Minor
changes of detail were also used in the Manchu inscriptions on Qing dynasty coins for the same purpose.

# KEY TO ILLUSTRATIONS NB. Positions of characters on coins:

T = top; b = bottom; R = right; L = left; C = centre of field.

Scripts: GSS = Great Seal Script; SSS = Small Seal Script; CLS = Clerk's Script;

PS = Pattern Script; CUS = Cursive Script; GS = Grass Script.

1.  Bronze hoe coin of Zhou kings (in Northern Henan Province) issued in 5th century BC, inscribed
tu \[R\] (= earth) in Great Seal Script (GSS). The significance of the inscription is uncertain, but
probably represents the personal name of an official responsible for its production being used as a mint control mark.

2.  Bronze hoe coin of city of Liang in the feudal state of Wei (in Northern Henan Province) issued

- 350 BC, inscribed with its mint name liang \[upper R\], its token value zheng shang jin \[lower R
and C\] (= exact value 1 jin (hoe) ), and denomination by weight bang lie \[L\] (= worth 1 lie) all in

GSS. This SIX character inscription is written in three vertical columns from right to left. Its
i n t e r p r e t a t i o n is problematic, but i t is clearly intended to indicate a double system of valuation
r e l a t e d to the jin, the contemporary name for the hoe coin and to the l i e a s t a n d a r d unit used in weighing metal for monetary use.

3.  Bronze hoe coin of Anyi c i t y in the feudal s t a t e of Wei (also known as Liang, in South West

Shanxi Province) issued c. 300 BC, inscribed with i t s mint name anyi \[R\] and i t s denomination er jin

(= two hoes) \[Ll in GSS. The d e s i g n e r of t h i s coin has made an e f f o r t to balance h i s i n s c r i p t i o n
and to create regular shapes for each of the characters.

4.  Bronze hoe coin of c i t y of Anyang in the feudal s t a t e of Wei (in Northern Henan Province)
issued c. 250 BC, inscribed with i t s mint name anyang \[RL\] in GSS.

5.  Bronze hoe coin of c i t y of S i s h i in the feudal s t a t e of Zhao (in C e n t r a l Shanxi Province)
issued c. 250 BC, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s mint name s i s h i \[RL\] and i t s denomination ban

\[lower L\] (= half hoe) and on the back with a mint control mark si \[C\] (= four) ** ** **in** GSS.

6.  Bronze knife coin of Qi c i t y c a p i t a l of feudal s t a t e of Qi (in Shandong Province) issued c. 300

BC, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s mint name qi \[T\] and i t s f u n c t i o n fahua [C and B] (= l e g a l
money) and on the back with i t s denomination s a n s h i \[T and C\] (= t h i r t y huo) and a mint control mark
shang \[B\] (= above), a l l w r i t t e n in GSS. The denomination is expressed in huo o r i g i n a l l y the value
of a knife coin but by t h i s date a considerably smaller amount of monetary metal (c. 1.5 gr). No. 8 below is denominated by the same standard.

7. Bronze ** round** coin of c i t y of Yuan in the feudal  s t a t e of Wei (Liang in South West Shanxi

Province), issued c. 250 BC, inscribed with i t s mint name yuan \[R\] in GSS.

8.  Bronze round coin of c i t y of Yi in the feudal s t a t e of Qi (in Shandong Province) issued c. 250

BC, ** inscribed with** i t s mint name ** yi** \[R\] and i t s ** denomination** l i u huo \[L\] (= six huo) a l l in GSS.

**9.** Bronze cash coin of Qin Shi Huang, Emperor of the Qin dynasty (221-210 BC) issued from 221 BC,
i n s c r i b e d with i t s denomination by weight ban l i a n g \[RL\] (= half ounce) in SSS. Qin Shi Huang,

China's f i r s t Emperor was a g r e a t reformer; the i n t r o d u c t i o n of both the cash coins and the Small

Seal S c r i p t were p a r t of h i s g e n e r a l reform of h i s s t a t e bureaucracy. (The term cash is used in

English for the Chinese standard square holed bronze coins. The Chinese name for such coins i s qian
or wen. The name cash i s used here as i t i s more f a m i l i a r. I t o r i g i n a t e d in the pidgin E n g l i s h
used by B r i t i s h merchants t r a d i n g in the p a r t s of South China around Hong Kong. They borrowed i t
from the Portuguese traders there who had given the name caixa to a l l copper coins they came across
in the East, because the f i r s t o r i e n t a l copper coins they saw were the karsha of South India.)

1 0 - 1 1. Bronze cash coins of the Han dynasty (206 BC - AD 220) i s s u e d by Emperor Wu Di (no. 10)

- 118 BC and by Emperor Ling Di (no. 11) c. AD 186, both i n s c r i b e d with t h e i r denomination by
weight wuzhu \[RL\] (= five grains) ** in** SSS. I t is possible to d i s t i n g u i s h the issues of Emperors Wu Di

**and Ling Di on** the basis of the differences in style of their i n s c r i p t i o n s. In particular ** note the **
earlier piece has squared ends on the right hand part of the character zhu \[L\], while the later
piece has rounded ends on the same element. Archaeological and numismatic studies have enabled
modern scholars to recognize the significance of such distinctions. It is not certain whether these
changes were deliberately made by their issuers to identify their own coins or whether they simply
represent a chronological development in style. The later coin does however have on its reverse a
control device which it is known was intentionally applied during the reign of Ling Di to identify
the issue. This device consists of four lines radiating from the corners of the holes to the outer
rim. The literary records of this period describe this feature of the coins as the sichu (= 4 out going lines).

12. 100 cash token coin attributed to Shu Han Dynasty issued c. AD 220-255, inscribed with its
function tai qian \[TL\] (= large coin) and its token value ping bai \[BR\] (= worth 100) in SSS.

The whole inscription is read in the order tai ping bai qian (literally, large worth 100 coin). One
rare variety of this issue is the first coin to have a Clerk's Script inscription; another is one of
the few Chinese coins to have a pictorial reverse design showing what is normally interpreted as a water pattern.

13-14. Bronze cash coins of Emperor Gao Zu of the Tang Dynasty issued from AD 621, inscribed with
their date kai yuan \[TB\] (= the beginning (of the Dynasty) ) and function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin,
literally circulating treasure) in CLS in the hand of the calligrapher Ouyang Xun. These two pieces
show minor variations in the execution of Ouyang's design made for administrative reasons so that
separate batches of the issue could be distinguished from each other. The dot and crescent marks on
the reverse are thought to serve a similar purpose. Coins with this inscription were first issued
in AD 621. Both literary evidence and the abundance of these coins suggest that repeated issues of
them were made at later dates throughout the Tang period (AD 618-906), with a particularly large
issue made in the mid-9th century distinguished by its use of mint names on the reverse.

15. Bronze 50 cash token of the Emperor Su Zong of the Tang Dynasty issued in AD 759, inscribed
with its date by era name qian yuan \[TB\] (= AD 758-760) and its function zhong bao \[RL\] (= large
coin, literally heavy treasure) in CLS. The reverse of this coin is marked by a circle in the field following the line of the outer rim.

16-17. Bronze cash coins of the Southern Tang Dynasty issued c. AD 956, inscribed with their date
by dynastic name tang guo \[TB\] (= the kingdom of Tang) and function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) in SSS

(no. 16) and Pattern Script (PS) (no. 17). The date on these coins can also be seen as an
expression of their issuing authority. The use of two different scripts on the coins of this issue
was an administrative device to distinguish the two parts of it.

18. Bronze cash coin of Emperor Tai Zu of the Northern Song Dynasty, issued in AD 968, inscribed
with its date by dynastic name song \[T\] (= the Song dynasty) and its function yuan tong bao \[BRL\] (=
first coin) in CLS. This inscription was closely based on the kai yuan tong bao issue of the first

Emperor of the Tang dynasty. It was designed by the court calligrapher, Ouyang Xiu, a descendant of Ouyang Xun who designed the Tang coin.
1 9 - 2 1. Bronze cash coins of Emperor Tai Zong of the Northern Song Dynasty, i s s u e d in AD 990,
i n s c r i b e d with t h e i r d a t e by era name chun hua \[TR\] (= AD 990-994) and function yuan bao \[BL\] (=
coin) in CLS (no. 19) Cursive S c r i p t (CUS) (no. 20) and Grass S c r i p t (GS) (no. 21). The three
s c r i p t s used here were probably intended to distinguish the different parts of t h i s issue. Cursive
and Grass Scripts were used here for the f i r s t time on coins.

22-27. Bronze cash coin of Emperor Shen Zong of the Northern Song dynasty, issued in AD 1068,
inscribed with their date by era name xining [TR] (= AD 1068-1077) and their function yuan bao [RL]

$$ (= coin) $$ in CLS (no. 22), PS (nos. 23-24) and SSS (nos. 25-27). The xining p e r i o d saw a large
increase in cash production, as the government attempted to fully monetise the currency. In order
to control the o f f i c i a l s responsible for t h i s enormous issue of coins, distinguishing features had
to be i n t r o d u c e d in the coin d e s i g n which a p p a r e n t l y corresponds with the d i f f e r e n t mints and
p e r i o d s of i s s u e. These f e a t u r e s can s t i l l be observed, but no r e c o r d s s u r v i v e to show how the
system o p e r a t e d. The xining yuan bao coins were d i s t i n g u i s h e d in two ways. The coins were
d i v i s i b l e i n t o two main groups by the s c r i p t s used in t h e i r d e s i g n s, one in Seal S c r i p t, and the
o t h e r in C l e r k ' s or P a t t e r n S c r i p t. They were f u r t h e r d i f f e r e n t i a t e d i n t o s m a l l e r batches by

| s t y l i s t i c s changes of d e t a i l. | There appears to be a correspondence between the s t y l i s t i c changes in |
|:--- |:--- |
| the two main groups so t h a t no. 22 and no. 25, although in markedly d i f f e r e n t | s c r i p t s, share a |
| related | s t y l e. |
the two main groups so t h a t no. 22 and no. 25, although in markedly d i f f e r e n t s c r i p t s, share a related s t y l e.

28-29. Bronze two cash coins of Emperor Hui Zong of the Northern Song Dynasty, issued in AD 1101,
inscribed with their date by dynastic name sheng song \[TR\] (= Holy Song dynasty) and their function
yuan bao [LB] (= c o i n ), in SSS (no. 28) and CUS (no. 29). The era name was not used on these coins
as i t was a four c h a r a c t e r p h r a s e j i a n zhong qing guo which was too long for a coin and could not be
a b b r e v i a t e d as the era name Jianzhong had a l r e a d y been used on a coin in the Tang period (AD 780-

783). Similar i n s c r i p t i o n s were used at other times: huang song (Imperial Song) in AD 1093 and 1253 and da song (the Great Song) in AD 1225.

30.  Bronze cash token coin of Emperor Hui Zong of the Northern Song Dynasty, issued AD 1102
inscribed with i t s date by era name chong ning \[TR\] (= AD 1102-1106) and i t s function tong bao \[BL\]

$$ (= coin) $$ in PS in the Emperor's own hand in the highly p e r s o n a l i s e d Slender Gold S t y l e which he invented himself.

31.  Bronze 10 cash token coin of Emperor Hui Zong of the Northern Song Dynasty, issued AD 1104,
inscribed with i t s date by era name chong ning \[TB\] (= AD 1102-1106) and i t s function zhong bao \[RL\]

(= l a r g e coin). Like no. 28 t h i s coin is a l s o in the Emperor's own hand, but now in his v e r s i o n of

# CLS.

*32.* Bronze 10 cash token coins of Emperor Zhang Zong of the Jin (Northern Tartars) dynasty, issued

AD 1204 inscribed with its date by era name tai he \[TB\] (= AD 1201-1208) and function zhong bao \[RL\]

(= large coin) in a very elegant version of SSS.

33. Bronze cash coin of Emperor Cheng Zu of the Ming dynasty issued in AD 1408, inscribed with its
date by era name yong le [TB] (= AD 1403-1424) and function tong bao [RL] (= coin) in PS.
34.  Brass cash coin of Prince Fu, a Ming pretender, a grandson of the Ming Emperor Shen Zong (1573-

1620), who held Jiangsu and Anhui Provinces against the Manchus during AD 1644-5, issued AD 1645 at
the Fengyang mint in Anhui P r o v i n c e, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s d a t e by era name hong guang

\[TB\] (= AD 1644-5) and i t s function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) and on the back with i t s Ming name f eng

\[T\] (an a b b r e v i a t i o n of Fengyang), a l l in CLS. This is the l a s t use of the C l e r k ' s s c r i p t on an issued cash coin.

35.  Brass 10 cash token coin of Wu Sangui, a Ming r e b e l who i n i t i a l l y supported the invading

Manchus, but later rose against them. Wu Sangui was rewarded by the Manchus for his assistance with
the g o v e r n o r s h i p of South west China, but in 1674 he d e c l a r e d himself Emperor and issued his own
c o i n s. This coin was issued in AD 1674 and is i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s date by era name

Zhao wu \[TB\] $$ (= AD 1674-1678) $$ and function tong bao \[RL\] $$ (= coin) $$ and on the back with i t s
denomination in s i l v e r by weight yi fen \[RL\] (=.01 ounce) a l l in SSS. On t h i s and the p r e v i o u s
coin the use of an archaic s c r i p t seems to be purely for decorative purposes. I t is the l a t e s t use
of seal s c r i p t on a cash coin. The use of a denomination in s i l v e r by weight r e f l e c t s the e f f o r t s
of the l a t e Ming and e a r l y Qing a d m i n i s t r a t i o n to fix the r a t i o between cash coins and s i l v e r
bullion at 1000 cash = 1 ounce of s i l v e r, so that t h i s coin, denominated as.01 ounce of s i l v e r, is therefore a 10 cash piece.

36-37. Brass cash coins of pretender Prince Yang Ming, a grandson of the Emperor Shen Zong (1573-

1620), issued in AD 1661 by an adherent of t h i s p r e t e n d e r c a l l e d Zheng Chenggong (known to
contemporary Europeans as Koxinga) who ruled Taiwan and held for some time p a r t of mainland Fujian

Province. These coins were made for Koxinga at Nagasaki in Japan. They were inscribed with their
date by e r a name yong l i [TB] (= AD 1646-1662) and function tong bao [RL] (= coin) in SSS (no. 36)
and CUS (no. 37). No. 37 is the l a s t example of the use of Cursive S c r i p t on a cash coin.

38.  Cash coin of the Manchu Khan Nurhaci, Emperor Tai Zu of the Qing dynasty, issued at Liaoyang in

Liaoning Province in AD 1622-1625, inscribed with i t s date by era name abkai fulingga han \[LRT\] ( =

AD 1616-1635, l i t e r a l l y the Tianming Khan) and function jiha \[B\] (= coin) written in Manchu s c r i p t,
an a d a p t a t i o n of Mongol s c r i p t made by Nurhaci in AD 1579 for use in the w r i t i n g of the Manchu
language. Manchurian was kept in use as an o f f i c i a l language throughout the Qing dynasty. I t was
used in a form s l i g h t l y d i f f e r e n t to t h a t used in t h i s coin, as in AD 1632 the s c r i p t underwent
amendments in order to make i t s p r o n u n c i a t i o n c l e a r e r and so t h a t i t could be used in the transcription of the Chinese language.

39-42. Cash coins of Emperor Shi Zu of the Qing dynasty made a t the Board of Revenue mint in

Beijing (Peking), issued in 1644 (no. 39), 1646 (no. 40), 1653 (no. 41), 1657 (no. 42), i n s c r i b e d
on the f r o n t with t h e i r date by era name Shun zhi \[TB\] (= AD 1644) and function tong bao \[RL\]

(= coin) and on the back with nothing (no. 39), or with t h e i r mint name hu \[R (nos. 40 & 41)\]

( a b b r e v i a t i o n of Hubu = Board of Revenue mint), denomination in s i l v e r yi l i $$ [L] (=.0001 ounce) $$

(no. 42) or mint name in Manchu boo ciowan \[LR\] (= Treasure's source, the l i t e r a r y name of the Board
of Revenue Mint) (no. 42). The Chinese i n s c r i p t i o n s are a l l in PS.
43-45. Cash coins of the Emperor Sheng Zu of the Qing dynasty made by the Board of Revenue mint
in B e i j i n g (nos. 43-44) and by the Jiangnan Province Mint at Nanjing (no. 4 5), in 1662 (nos. 43 &

45. and 1713 (no. 44), i n s c r i b e d on the front with t h e i r date by era name kang xi [TB] (= AD 1662-

1722. and function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) and on the back with their mint name in Manchu boo ciowan

\[LR\] (= Board of Revenue mint) (nos. 43-4) or in Chinese ning \[R\] and Manchu ning \[L\] (abbreviation
of Jiangning, old name of Nanjing) (no. 45). The difference in calligraphic d e t a i l between nos. 43
and 44 is a r e s u l t of the method used by the mint administration to distinguish the issues of each
year. During the Qing dynasty r e g u l a r v a r i a t i o n s were made to the d e t a i l s of the coin d e s i g n, so
t h a t each c o i n ' s year of i s s u e could be determined. The mint must have kept a record of these
changes, but i t has not survived. I t is nevertheless possible to make an approximate i n t e r p r e t a t i o n
of these changes and a t t r i b u t e coins to their approximate period of issue. The Kangxi era lasted 60
y e a r s, but i t i s p o s s i b l e on the b a s i s of a study of the v a r i e t i e s to a t t r i b u t e nos. 43 and 45 to
the beginning year or y e a r s of the e r a. No. 44 is a l a t e r i s s u e and because of the unusual form of
the character xi used (compare i t with the form used on nos. 43 and 45 and note that there is not a
s e p a r a t e l i n e in the upper l e f t hand p a r t of the c h a r a c t e r ), i t has been suggested t h a t t h i s is a
commemorative issue marking the Emperor's 60th birthday in AD 1713. All the Chinese inscriptions are in PS.

46.  Cash coin of Emperor Shi Zong of the Qing dynasty made by the Zhejiang Province Mint at

Hangzhou issued in c. AD 1733, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s d a t e by era name yong zheng \[TB\]

(= AD 1723-36) and i t s function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) and on the back with i t s mint name in Manchu
boo J e \[LR\] (= Zhejiang Province Mint). The Chinese i n s c r i p t i o n is in PS.

47-49. Cash coins of Emperor Gao Zong of the Qing dynasty made by the Board of Revenue Mint in

B e i j i n g, issued in c. AD 1736 (no. 47) and c. AD 1750 (no. 48) and c. AD 1770 (no. 49), i n s c r i b e d on
the f r o n t with t h e i r d a t e by era name, qian long \[TB\] (= AD 1736-95) and f u n c t i o n tong bao \[RL\]

(= coin) and on the back with their mint name in Manchu boo ciowan \[LRl (= Board of Revenue Mint).

The Chinese i n s c r i p t i o n is in PS. On the basis of comparisons of the fabric and inscription style
of these coins with those of e a r l i e r and l a t e r coins, i t is possible to assign them approximately to
p e r i o d s a t the beginning, middle and end of the long e r a. The use of an unusual form of the
character long on the l a t e r period coin is probably an indication that i t is a special issue. This
has in the p a s t been i n t e r p r e t e d as a s i g n a l that such coins were i s s u e d during the J i a q i n g era

(1796-1820) in honour of Gao Zong after his abdication. Gao Zong abdicated after 60 years of rule,
but retained a position in the Imperial Court, but t h i s is no reason for supposing that coins were
issued with the Qianlong era i n s c r i p t i o n a f t e r the end of t h a t e r a. I t is however p o s s i b l e to
i d e n t i f y t h i s s p e c i a l i s s u e in the same way as the s p e c i a l i s s u e of the Kangxi era (no. 44) and
a t t r i b u t e i t to the year of Gao Zong's 60th birthday, AD 1770.

50-53. Cash c o i n s of Emperor Ren Zong of the Qing dynasty made by the Board of Revenue mint in

B e i j i n g, i s s u e d c. AD 1796, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with t h e i r d a t e by e r a name j i a qing \[TB\] (= AD

1796-1820) and function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) in PS and on the back with their mint name in Manchu
boo ciowan \[LR\] (= Board of Revenue mint). These four coins are distinguished by minor differences
of d e t a i l which i d e n t i f y them as p r o d u c t s of the four workshops of the Board of Revenue mint.
Imperial records have preserved d e t a i l s of this administrative device so that i t is now possible to
a t t r i b u t e nos. 50-53 to the E a s t, South, West and North o f f i c e s of the mint r e s p e c t i v e l y. These
d i s t i n c t i o n s continued in use u n t i l the l a s t issue of Imperial cash from the Board of Revenue mint in 1911.

54.  Cash coins of Emperor Xuan Zong of the Qing dynasty cast by the Board of Works mint in Beijing,
issued c. AD 1821, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s date by era name dao guang \[TB\] (= AD 1821-50)
and f u n c t i o n tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) in PS and on the back with i t s mint name in Manchu boo yowan

\[LR\] (= the spring of treasure, the l i t e r a r y name of the Board of Works mint). Large cash like t h i s
were c a s t at the two Beijing mints for court use. They were about twice the weight of regular cash
and were used by the court to pay o f f i c i a l s or for l a r g e s s e. Because of t h e i r s i z e and s p e c i a l
purpose, their designs were of better quality than the regular issues.

55-57. 1000 and 20 cash token coins of Emperor Wen Zong of the Qing dynasty, cast by the Board of

Revenue mint in Beijing (no. 55) and the Fujian Province mint at Fuzhou (nos. 56-57), issued in

1854, inscribed on the front with their date by era name xian feng \[TB\] (= AD 1851-61) and function
yuan bao [RL] (= coin) (no. 55) and zhong bao [RL] (= coin) (nos. 56-57) and on the back with t h e i r
mint name in Manchu boo ciowan \[LR\] (= Board of Revenue mint) (no. 55) or boo fu [LR] (= Fujian

Province mint) (nos. 56-57) and token value dang qian [TB] (= worth 1000) (no. 55) or er s h i [TB]

(= 20) (nos. 56-57) and denomination by weight ji zhong yi liang \[on the rim RLTB (no. 56) or in the
field in two v e r t i c a l columns R and L (no. 57)\] (= weight 1 ounce). The Chinese inscriptions are in

# PS.

58.  Cash coin of Emperor Mu Zong of the Qing dynasty, c a s t by the Yunnan Province mint at Yunnan

(now Kunming), issued c. AD 1862, i n s c r i b e d on the front with i t s date by era name tong zhi \[TB\]

(= AD 1862-74) and i t s function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) in PS and on the back with i t s mint name in

Manchu boo yun \[LR\] (= Yunnan Province mint) and a c o n t r o l mark da \[T\] (= big) in PS. The purpose
of the c o n t r o l mark i s not known, but i t must have been used for a d m i n i s t r a t i v e purposes at the mint.

59-60. Cash coins of Emperor De Zong of the Qing dynasty s t r u c k on European machinery by the

Guangdong Province mint at Guangzhou (Canton) (no. 59), issued in 1889, and the Nanjing mint

(no. 60), issued in the 1890's, i n s c r i b e d on the front with t h e i r d a t e by era name guang xu \[TB\]

(= AD 1875-1908) and function tong bao \[RL\] (= c o i n ), and on the back e i t h e r with the mint name in

Chinese guang \[R\] and Manchu quwang \[L\] (= Guangdong Province mint) and the denomination by weight
ku ping \[T\] yi qian \[B\] (= 0.1 ounce on the t r e a s u r y scale) (no. 59), or j u s t the mint name in

Manchu boo ning \[LR\] (= Nanjing mint) (no. 60). The Chinese i n s c r i p t i o n s are in PS.

61.  Cash coins of Emperor De Zong of the Qing dynasty struck by uncertain mint (possibly Fujian or

Guangdong Province mint) issued in AD 1906, i n s c r i b e d on the f r o n t with i t s d a t e by d y n a s t i c name
da qing [TB] (= AD 1644-1911) and function tong bi [RL] (= b r a s s coin) and on the back with i t s
denomination yi wen \[TB\] (= one cash) in PS. This coin was part of a national issue of d o l l a r s and
cents i n i t i a t e d in 1906. The inscriptions are borrowed from the copper cents of this coinage which
are also inscribed da qing tong bi and are denominated as shi wen (= 10 cash).

62.  Cash coin of Emperor Puyi of the Qing dynasty c a s t by the Yunnan Province mint ( l o c a t i o n
uncertain) issued in AD 1909; inscribed on the front with i t s date by era name xuan tong \[TB\] (= AD

1909-1911) and function tong bao \[RL\] (= coin) and on the back with i t s mint name in Manchu boo yun

\[LR\] (= Yunnan Province mint) and a control mark shan \[T\] (= mountain). The Chinese inscription is **in** ** PS. **

63-65. Bronze 10 and 1 cash c o i n s of the Rebel Hong Xiuquan (Tian Wang), leader of the Taiping
rebels, issued AD 1851-1854 inscribed on the front with their date by dynastic name t a i ping tian
guo [TBRL] (= Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, 1851-1864) (no. 63), t a i ping \[TB\] (no. 64) or tian guo \[TB\]

(no. 65) and function sheng bao (= holy coin) \[RL\] (no. 63) and on the r e v e r s e w i t h e i t h e r the
second p a r t of the d y n a s t i c name t i a n quo \[RL\] (no. 64) or t h e i r f u n c t i o n sheng bao \[TB\] (= holy
coin) (nos. 63 & 65). The l o c a t i o n of the mints of the Taiping r e b e l s i s not known, but i t i s
thought t h a t the use of v a r i o u s i n s c r i p t i o n s on t h e s e c o i n s is an i n d i c a t i o n of a d i f f e r e n t mint being responsible for each v a r i e t y.

66.  2 cash coin of the Chinese Republic c a s t by the Fujian Province mint a t Fuzhou issued in 1912
inscribed on the front with i t s mint name fu jian \[TB\] and i t s function tong bao [RL] (= coin) and
on the back with i t s d e n o m i n a t i o n er wen \[TB\] (= 2 cash) in PS. On e i t h e r s i d e of the hole on the
back are the f l a g s of the Republic marked with h o r i z o n t a l bars (on the r i g h t ) and a s t a r (on the left).

In t h i s survey Chinese characters have been t r a n s l i t e r a t e d into the form of romanisation most widely
used and taught both i n s i d e and o u t s i d e China. This r o m a n i s a t i o n i s known as Pinyin and is the
s y s t e m o f f i c i a l l y p r o m o t e d by t h e C h i n e s e P e o p l e ' s R e p u b l i c. I t i s v e r y s u i t a b l e for
t r a n s c r i p t i o n as i t not only closely matches the sounds of Modern Standard Chinese (Mandarin) but is
a l s o based on a s p e l l i n g system c l o s e l y r e l a t e d to the English p r o n u n c i a t i o n of the l e t t e r s used.

For the non-Chinese speaker i t is a good rule of thumb to pronounce a l l l e t t e r s as one would expect
them to be pronounced in English with only the following exceptions:- Consonants: pronounce c as t s in i t s q as tch in kitchen (qu = tch + u) X as s in swan z as ds in Dad's zh as j in Joe

Vowels: pronounce e a f t e r a consonant at the end of the word as a in woman
i after x, j or q at the end of a word as the ee in sheep c, X or z " " " " " u in fur ch, r, sh or zh " " " " ir in bird <!-- OCR: --- ***f*** *** ^Jv *** -->

<!-- OCR: # X **-. X ** -->

<!-- OCR: # y **-^'-** -->